
--- Slide 1 ---

Availability heuristic
Alexander AgafonovAnton OreshkinKristina Kiseleva

--- Slide 2 ---

Availability heuristic (availability bias)

--- Slide 3 ---

Herbert A. Simon (06.15.1916-02.09.2001)
An American scientist in a field of social, political and economic sciences
In 1957 wrote a work in which he argued that human rationality in making decisions is limited
According to his concept, people cannot be completely rational due to cognitive limitations. Simon called it "bounded rationality"
In 1978 his work got the Nobel Prize in Economics "for pioneering research into the decision-making process in economic organisations, in firms"

--- Slide 4 ---

Daniel Kahneman(born 03.05.1934)
An Israeli-American author, psychologist and economist notable for his work on the psychology of judgment and decision-making, as well as behavioral economics, for which he was awarded the 2002 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences (shared with Vernon L. Smith)
Working with Amos Tversky, established a cognitive basis for common human errors that arise from heuristics and biases, and developed prospect theory and then they cooperated with Paul Slavic and made the work named "Towards a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice" in 1980.
In 2011he was named by Foreign Policy magazine in its list of top global thinkers. In the same year his book "Thinking, Fast and Slow", which summarizes much of his researches became a best seller
He is professor emeritus of psychology and public affairs at Princeton University's Princeton School of Public and International Affairs.

--- Slide 5 ---

Amos N. Tversky(03.16.1937-06.02.1996)
An Israeli cognitive and mathematical psychologist. Was working with discovery of systematic human cognitive bias and handling of risk.
Worked with Daniel Kahneman to develop "prospect theory", which aims to explain irrational human economic choices and is considered one of the seminal works of behavioral economics
After his death in 2002 Kahneman got the Nobel Prize for the work he had done with Tversky

--- Slide 6 ---

Fresh concept
Previosly it was thought that humans are absolutely rational actors. Kahneman and Tversky  explained that judgment under uncertainty often relies on a limited number of simplifying heuristics rather than extensive algorithmic processing. In a short time, this idea spread beyond academic psychology, into law, medicine and political science. 
According to "availability heuristic" human errors can be explained by cognitive processes and not motivated irrationality.

--- Slide 7 ---

Biases due to the retrievability of instances.
First example
Second example
30% > 30%

--- Slide 8 ---

Biases due to the effectiveness of a search set
r_ _ _ _ _
First example
Second example
_ _ r _ _ _
>
Old customer
New customer

--- Slide 9 ---

Biases of imaginability
10 people
k groups
k
8
2
First example
Second example
investment

--- Slide 10 ---

Illusory correlation
First example
Second example