===== PAGE 1 =====

A COURSE IN

BEHAVIORAL
ECONOMICS

SECOND EDITION

CREATED BY

ERIK ANGNER

TICKET NO | 9781187512925
ISSUED BY | MACMILLAN EDUCATION
PALGRAVE

A 69 07 08 il 63 07 LS
B @5 12 09 86 82 01 03 LS
Cc 68 5 63 26 i5 07 LS

3X LUCKY SPIN 3.68

===== PAGE 2 =====

A Course in Behavioral Economics

===== PAGE 3 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 4 =====

A Course in
Behavioral Economics

Second edition

Erik Angner

George Mason University, USA

te Palgrave

===== PAGE 5 =====

© Erik Angner 2016

All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this
publication may be made without written permission.

No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency,
Saffron House, 6-10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.

Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.

The author has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this
work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

First edition published 2012

Second edition published 2016 by

PALGRAVE MACMILLAN

Palgrave in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited,
registered in England, company number 785998, of 4 Crinan Street,
London, N1 9XW.

Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC,
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.

Palgrave is a global imprint of the above companies and is represented
throughout the world.

Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States,
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.

ISBN 978—-1—-137-51292-S paperback

This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully
managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing
processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the
country of origin.

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.

===== PAGE 6 =====

To Iris

===== PAGE 7 =====

The master-piece of philosophy would be to develop the means which Providence
employs to attain the ends it proposes over man, and to mark out accordingly a few
lines of conduct which might make known to this unhappy biped individual the way
in which he must walk within the thorny career of life, that he might guard against the
whimsical caprices of this fatality to which they give twenty different names, without
having as yet come to understand or define it.

The Marquis de Sade, Justine

===== PAGE 8 =====

Contents

List of Figures
List of Tables

Preface

Acknowledgments
About the Author

Introduction

1 Introduction

14
1.2
1.3
1.4

Economics: Neoclassical and behavioral
The origins of behavioral economics
Methods

Looking ahead

Part1 = Choice under Certainty

2 Rational Choice under Certainty

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8

Introduction

Preferences

Rational preferences

difference and strict preference
Preference orderings

Choice under certainty

Utility

Discussion

3 Decision-Making under Certainty

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.6
3.7

Introduction

Opportunity costs

Sunk costs

Menu dependence and the decoy effect
Loss aversion and the endowment effect
Anchoring and adjustment

Discussion

Part 2 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty
4 Probability Judgment

41
4.2
43

Introduction
Fundamentals of probability theory
Unconditional probability

xii
xiii
xvi

xvii

ANAwWwW

13
13
13

19
24
25
28
31

34
34
34
4
46
52
65
68

15
15
15
79

===== PAGE 9 =====

viii

Contents

44
45
46
47

Conditional probability

Total probability and Bayes’s rule
Bayesian updating

Discussion

5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

5.1
5.2

Introduction

The gambler’s fallacy

Conjunction and disjunction fallacies
Base-rate neglect

Confirmation bias

Availability

Overconfidence

Discussion

Part 3 Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6

Introduction
Uncertainty
Expected value
Expected utility
Attitudes toward risk
Discussion

7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty

7.1
7.2
7.3
74
7.5
7.6
V7

Part 4

Introduction

Framing effects in decision-making under risk
Bundling and mental accounting

The Allais problem and the sure-thing principle
The Ellsberg problem and ambiguity aversion
Probability weighting

Discussion

Intertemporal Choice

8 The Discounted Utility Model

8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5

Introduction

Interest rates

Exponential discounting
What is the rational delta?
Discussion

9 Intertemporal Choice

9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6

Introduction

Hyperbolic discounting
Choosing not to choose
Preferences over profiles
Misprediction and miswanting
Discussion

84
88
91
93

98
98
98
102
106
110
113
116
120

129
129
129
133
140
145
149

153
153
153
159
165
168
171
175

181
181
181
185
191
193

195
195
195
202
206
210
214

===== PAGE 10 =====

Part 5 Strategic Interaction

10 Analytical Game Theory

10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5

Introduction

Nash equilibrium in pure strategies
Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies
Equilibrium refinements

Discussion

11. Behavioral Game Theory

11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5

Introduction

Social preferences: Altruism, envy, fairness, and justice
Intentions, reciprocity, and trust

Limited strategic thinking

Discussion

Part 6 Concluding Remarks

12 Behavioral Welfare Economics, Libertarian Paternalism, and the
Nudge Agenda

12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5

Introduction

Behavioral welfare economics

Libertarian paternalism and the nudge agenda
Criticism

Discussion

13 General Discussion

Appendix: Answer Key
Bibliography

Index

221
221
221
228
233
237

240
240
240
246
249
251

257
257
258
259
262
265

268

303
310

Contents

ix

===== PAGE 11 =====

21
2.2
2.3
2.4

2.6
27
2.8

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5

3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11
3.12
3.13
3.14

41
4.2
43
44
45
46

5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4

Figures

Set of alternatives

The Marx brothers

Preference ordering with tie
Indifference curves

Budget set

Consumer choice problem

Preference ordering with utility function
Indifference curves and utility

Simple decision tree

Everyday decision tree

Decision tree with utilities and opportunity costs
Multi-stage drinking problem
Multi-stage investment problem
Preference orderings over food
Decoy effect

Decoy effect exercise

The value of a coffee mug
Preference ordering with mug

Utility over mugs

Value function

Value function and the car problem
Indifference curves and loss aversion

The two dice

Lotto 6/49 ticket

The frisbee factory

Bayesian updating

John’s and Wes's probabilities after repeated trials
Governor Schwarzenegger's letter

Winning ticket sold here
Breast cancer screening
Confirmation bias

John’s confirmation bias

Ready for rain?

Simple gamble

Choice between gambles
Multi-stage gamble
Roulette table

15
16
24
25
26
27
28
30

35
36
36
41
42
47
48
50
53
53
54
56
56
62

83
85
88
91
93
96

100
106
111
111

130
133
134
135
136

===== PAGE 12 =====

6.6
6.7
6.8

6.10

71
7.2

7.4
7.5
7.6

8.1
8.2
8.3

10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5

11.1
11.2

12.1
12.2

Deal or No Deal

The utility of money

Risk aversion

S-shaped utility functions
Finding the certainty equivalent

The utility of human lives

The value function

The value of human lives

Integration vs. segregation of gains
Evaluation of two gains

The probability-weighting function 2(-)

Time preference
Exponential discounting
Exponential discounting with indifference

Time-consistent preferences

Time-inconsistent preferences

Hyperbolic discounting

Ulysses and the Sirens. Detail of mosaic from Dougga, Tunisia
The peak-end rule

The peak-end rule, cont.

The suspects

The Leviathan

Subgame perfection
Subgame perfection exercise
The centipede game

The ultimatum game (in dollar terms)
The dictator game (in dollar terms)

Two kinds of behavior
Three kinds of traffic sign

List of Figures

138
141
145
146
147

154
155
156
159
160
173

187
188
189

197
197
198
202
208
209

225
228
235
237
237

241
243

259
260

xi

===== PAGE 13 =====

xii

10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13

11.1
11.2

Tables

Properties of weak preference, indifference, and strong preference
The Economist subscription offers

Umbrella problem

Decision under uncertainty

More decisions under uncertainty
The general decision problem
Roulette bets

St Petersburg gamble

St Petersburg gamble with utilities
Another gambling problem

The Allais problem

Sure-thing principle

Dan's urn

The Ellsberg problem

Risk attitudes according to prospect theory

Credit-card offers for customers with bad credit
Simple time-discounting problem
Time-discounting problems

Time-discounting problem (in dollars and utiles)

Red-velvet problem
Layaway payoff matrices
The happiest and unhappiest jobs of 2015

The makeup exam

A pure coordination game

An impure coordination game
Nash equilibrium exercises

The prisoners’ dilemma

The modified prisoners’ dilemma
A pure coordination game

An impure coordination game
Mixed Nash equilibrium exercises
Chicken

The stag hunt

Trembling-hand perfection, cont.
Subgame perfection

Dictator game utility payoffs
Prisoners’ dilemma (in dollar terms)

32
46

130
131
132
136
137
140
141
145

166
167
168
169
173

182
186
190
191

199
203
214

222
223
224
224
225
227
229
230
231
232
233
234
235

244
245

===== PAGE 14 =====

Preface

Asa Ph.D. student in economics, behavioral economics struck me as the most
exciting field of study by far. Even with the benefit of some spectacular teachers, though, I felt that the existing literature failed to convey an adequate
understanding of the nature and significance of the project, and how the many
different concepts and theories described as “behavioral” were tied together.
When as an assistant professor I was offered the opportunity to teach my
own course, I discovered that there were very few texts occupying the niche
between popular-science-style treatments, which do not contain enough substance for a university-level course, and original scientific papers, which are
not easily readable and typically fail to provide sufficient background to be
comprehensible to a novice reader.

This introduction to behavioral economics was written to be the book
I wish I had had as a student, and the book that I want to use as a teacher.
It aspires to situate behavioral economics in historical context, seeing it as
the result of a coherent intellectual tradition; it offers more substance than
popular books but more context than original articles; and while behavioral
economics is a research program as opposed to a unified theory, the book not
only describes individual concepts and theories but also tries to show how
they hang together. The book was designed to be used as a user-friendly,
self-contained, freestanding textbook suitable for a one-semester course for
advanced undergraduates, but can easily be used in conjunction with books
or articles in a variety of higher-level courses.

In recognition of the fact that many students of behavioral economics come
from outside traditional economics, the exposition was developed to appeal to
advanced undergraduates across the social and behavioral sciences, humanities, business, public health, and so on. The book contains no advanced mathematics and presupposes no knowledge of standard economic theory. If you
are sufficiently interested to pick up a copy of this book and read this far,
you have what it takes to grasp the material. Thorough battletesting at two
medium-sized state universities in the US over the course of several years
has confirmed that the treatment is accessible to economics majors and nonmajors alike.

Serious economics does not need to be intimidating, and this book aims
to prove it. Abstract, formal material is introduced in a progressively more
difficult manner, which serves to build confidence in students with limited
previous exposure. A wealth of examples and exercises serve to make the
underlying intuitions as clear as possible. In order to sustain the interest of
readers with different backgrounds, and to illustrate the vast applicability of
economic analysis, examples are drawn from economics, business, marketing, medicine, philosophy, public health, political science, public policy, and

xiii

===== PAGE 15 =====

xiv Preface

elsewhere. More open-ended problems encourage students to apply the ideas
and theories presented here to decision problems they might come across outside the classroom.

The book is arranged in five main parts: (1) choice under certainty,
(2) judgment under risk and uncertainty, (3) choice under risk and uncertainty,
(4) intertemporal choice, and (5) strategic interaction. Each of these parts contains two chapters: an even-numbered one outlining standard neoclassical
theory and an odd-numbered one discussing behavioral alternatives. A final
part (6) concludes. The unique structure makes it easy for instructors to teach
the book at a more advanced level, as they can easily assign even-numbered
chapters as background reading and supplement the odd-numbered chapters
with more advanced material of their choosing. Additional resources for general readers, students, and instructors are available via the companion website

The non-trivial amount of neoclassical theory in this book may warrant
explanation. First, because behavioral economics was developed in response
to neoclassical economics, large portions of behavioral economics can only
be understood against this background. Second, while behavioral economists
reject the standard theory as a descriptive theory, they typically accept it as a
normative theory. Third, much of behavioral economics is a modification or
extension of neoclassical theory. Finally, to assess the relative merits of neoclassical and behavioral economics, it is necessary to understand both. Just
as the study of a foreign language teaches students a great deal about their
native tongue, so the study of behavioral economics will teach them a lot
about standard economics.

As a textbook rather than an encyclopedia, this book does not aspire to
completeness but explores a selection of the most important ideas in behavioral economics and their interrelations. Many fascinating ideas, developments, and avenues of research have deliberately been omitted. No doubt
every behavioral economist will disagree with some of my decisions about
the things that were left out. But I think most will agree about the things that
were left in. The material presented in this book is, on the whole, uncontroversially part of the canon, and as such should be familiar to anyone who wishes
to have a basic grasp of behavioral economics.

Like standard introductory textbooks, this book does not aim to review the
empirical case offered in favor of the theories it presents. As a result, the exposition is uncluttered by extensive discussion of data, standards of evidence,
empirical (including experimental) methodology, and statistical techniques.
Instead, theories are illustrated with stories intended to elicit the intuition
underlying the theory and to demonstrate that it is not entirely implausible.
In this respect, the present book is no different from any of the widely used
introductions to microeconomics, to take one example.

For this second edition of the book, Palgrave sought extensive feedback
from current and prospective readers, including students and instructors,
from across the world. As a result, the book now contains several new sections, including an entire chapter on behavioral welfare economics and the
nudge agenda. Since the exercises (and answer key) turned out to be one of

===== PAGE 16 =====

the most appreciated features of the original edition, I added even more - and
of a wider range of difficulty levels. Meanwhile, I did my best to keep the book
readable and to-the-point (and also affordable).

For readers who wish to continue their study of behavioral economics,
or who want to know more about its methodology, history, and philosophy,
every chapter ends with a further reading section, which offers a selection of
citation classics, review articles, and advanced textbooks. While this may be
the first book in behavioral economics for many readers, my hope is that it will
not be the last.

Erik Angner

Preface

xv

===== PAGE 17 =====

xvi

Acknowledgments

This book draws on many different sources of inspiration. I am particularly
grateful to the teachers who set me off on this path (among them Cristina
Bicchieri, Robyn Dawes, Baruch Fischhoff, George Loewenstein, Philip Reny,
and Alvin Roth), whether or not they approve of the place to which it led,
and to the students (too numerous to name) who keep me on the straight and
narrow by catching errors and challenging me to explain the material better.

The manuscript was immensely improved by the encouragement and
criticism offered by Aléta Bezuidenhout, Kirsty Reade, and Jaime Marshall
at Palgrave, and by Elizabeth Stone’s meticulous handling of the production
process. I thank friends, colleagues, and anonymous reviewers for helpful
feedback on early drafts and Lillie Flowers, and Jared Sutton for able copyediting. Iam grateful to George MacKerron, Norris Peterson, Mark Raiffa, Daniel
Wood, and everybody else who spotted errors and shared their comments on
the first edition, and to Georgia Walters and Melanie Birdsall without whom
this second edition would have been far inferior.

The image of the mosaic of Ulysses and the Sirens is used with photographer Dennis Jarvis’s kind permission. The Swedish Transport Agency
(Transportstyrelsen) graciously granted the permission to use their images
of traffic signs. Original illustrations by Cody Taylor are used with the artist’s kind permission. The epigraph appears in Opus Sadicum (de Sade, 1889
[1791], p. 7). Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders, but if any
have been inadvertently overlooked we will be pleased to make the necessary arrangements at the first opportunity. I gratefully acknowledge support
from a Quality Enhancement Plan Development Grant from the University of
Alabama at Birmingham.

Most importantly, Elizabeth Blum’s love and support every step along the
way were essential to the completion of the project.

Further suggestions for improvement are most welcome via the companion website http://www.palgrave.com/angner2. As always, errors remain
my own.

===== PAGE 18 =====

About the Author

Erik Angner is Associate Professor of Philosophy, Economics, and Public Policy
at George Mason University, where he directs the undergraduate Philosophy,
Politics, and Economics (PPE) Program. As a result of serious mission creep,
he holds two PhDs — one in Economics and one in History and Philosophy of
Science — both from the University of Pittsburgh. He is the author of Hayek
and Natural Law as well as numerous journal articles and book chapters on
behavioral and experimental economics, the economics of happiness, and the
history, philosophy, and methodology of contemporary economics. He has
taught behavioral economics at the undergraduate level since 2006.

xvii

===== PAGE 19 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 20 =====

Introduction

1 Introduction

1.1 Economics: Neoclassical and behavioral
1.2 The origins of behavioral economics

1.3 Methods

1.4 Looking ahead

===== PAGE 21 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 22 =====

CHAPTER
Introduction = 1

1.1 Economics: Neoclassical and behavioral

This is a book about theories of decision. To use the language of the epigraph,
such theories are about the negotiation of “the thorny career of life”: they tell
us how we make, or how we should make, decisions. Not that the Marquis
de Sade would have spoken in these terms, living as he did in the eighteenth
century, but the theory of decision seems to be exactly what he had in mind
when he imagined “the master-piece of philosophy.”

Developing an acceptable theory of decision would be an achievement.
Most human activity — finance, science, medicine, arts, and life in general —
can be understood as a matter of people making certain kinds of decisions.
Consequently, an accurate theory of decision would cover a lot of ground.
Maybe none of the theories we will discuss is the masterpiece of which de
Sade thought so highly. Each theory can be, has been, and perhaps should be
challenged on various grounds. However, decision theory has been an active
area of research in recent decades, and it may have generated real progress.

Modern theories of decision (or theories of choice — I will use the terms
interchangeably) say little about what goals people will or should pursue.
Goals may be good or evil, mean-spirited or magnanimous, altruistic or egoistic, short-sighted or far-sighted; they may be Mother Teresa’s or the Marquis
de Sade’s. Theories of decision simply take a set of goals as given. Provided a
set of goals, however, the theories have much to say about how people will or
should pursue those goals.

Theories of decision are variously presented as descriptive or normative.
A descriptive theory describes how people in fact make decisions. A normative theory captures how people should make decisions. It is at least theoretically possible that people make the decisions that they should make. If so, one
and the same theory can simultaneously be descriptively adequate and normatively correct. However, it is possible that people fail to act in the manner
in which they should. If so, no one theory can be both descriptively adequate
and normatively correct.

Exercise 1.1 Descriptive vs. normative Which of the following claims are
descriptive and which are normative? (Answers to this and other exercises can.
be found in the Appendix.)

(a) Onaverage, people save less than 10 percent of their income for retirement.
(b) People do not save as much for retirement as they should.

(c) Very often, people regret not saving more for retirement.

===== PAGE 23 =====

4

Introduction

It can be unclear whether a claim is descriptive or normative. “People save too
little” is an example. Does this mean that people do not save as much as they
should? If so, the claim is normative. Does this mean that people do not save
as much as they wish they did? If so, the claim is descriptive.

Example 1.2 Poker Suppose that you are playing poker, and that you are
playing to win. Would you benefit from having an adequate descriptive theory, a correct normative theory, or both?

A descriptive theory would give you information about the actions of the
other players. A normative theory would tell you how you should behave in
light of what you know about the nature of the game, the expected actions
of the other players, and your ambition to win. All this information is obviously useful when playing poker. You would benefit from having both kinds
of theory.

Some theories of decision are described as theories of rational choice. In
everyday speech, the word “rationality” is used loosely; frequently it is used
simply as a mark of approval. For our purposes, a theory of rational decision
is best seen as a definition of rationality, that is, as specifying what it means
to be rational. Every theory of rational decision serves to divide decisions into
two classes: rational and irrational. Rational decisions are those that are in
accordance with the theory; irrational decisions are those that are not. A theory of rational choice can be thought of as descriptive or normative (or both).
To say that a theory of rational decision is descriptive is to say that people
in fact act rationally. To say that a theory of rational decision is normative is
to say that people should act rationally. To say that a theory of rational decision is simultaneously descriptive and normative is to say that people act and
should act rationally. Typically, the term rational-choice theory is reserved for
theories that are (or that are thought to be) normatively correct, whether or not
they are simultaneously descriptively adequate.

For generations now, economics has been dominated by an intellectual
tradition broadly referred to as neoclassical economics. If you have studied
economics but do not know whether or not you were taught in the neoclassical tradition, it is almost certain that you were. Neoclassical economics is
characterized by its commitment to a theory of rational choice that is simultaneously presented as descriptively adequate and normatively correct. This
approach presupposes that people by and large act in the manner that they
should. Neoclassical economists do not need to assume that all people act
rationally all the time, but they insist that deviations from perfect rationality
are so small or so unsystematic as to be negligible. Because of its historical
dominance, I will refer to neoclassical economics as standard economics, and
to neoclassical economic theory as standard theory.

This is an introduction to behavioral economics: the attempt to increase
the explanatory and predictive power of economic theory by providing it with
more psychologically plausible foundations, where “psychologically plausible” means consistent with the best available psychology. Behavioral economists share neoclassical economists’ conception of economics as the study
of people’s decisions under conditions of scarcity and of the results of those

===== PAGE 24 =====

Chapter 1 Introduction

decisions for society. But behavioral economists reject the idea that people by
and large behave in the manner that they should. While behavioral economists certainly do not deny that some people act rationally some of the time,
they believe that the deviations from rationality are large enough, systematic
enough, and consequently predictable enough, to warrant the development of
new descriptive theories of decision. If this is right, a descriptively adequate
theory cannot at the same time be normatively correct, and a normatively correct theory cannot at the same time be descriptively adequate.

1.2 The origins of behavioral economics

Behavioral economics can be said to have a short history but a long past. Only
in the last few decades has it emerged as an independent subdiscipline of economics. By now, top departments of economics have behavioral economists
on their staff. Behavioral economics gets published in mainstream journals.
Traditional economists incorporate insights from behavioral economics into
their work. In 2002, Daniel Kahneman (one of the most famous behavioral
economists) won the Nobel Memorial Prize “for having integrated insights
from psychological research into economic science, especially concerning
human judgment and decision-making under uncertainty.” In spite of its short
history, however, efforts to provide economics with plausible psychological
foundations go back a long way.

The establishment of modern economics is marked by the publication in
1776 of Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations. Classical economists such as Smith
are often accused of having a particularly simple-minded (and false) picture of
human nature, according to which people everywhere and always, in hyperrational fashion, pursue their narrowly construed self-interest. This accusation, however, is unfounded. Smith did not think people were rational:

How many people ruin themselves by laying out money on trinkets of
frivolous utility? What pleases these lovers of toys is not so much the utility, as the aptness of the machines which are fitted to promote it. All their
pockets are stuffed with little conveniences ... of which the whole utility is
certainly not worth the fatigue of bearing the burden.

Smith wrote these words 200 years before the era of pocket calculators, camera
phones, iPads, and smartwatches. Nor did Smith think people were selfish:
“[There] are evidently some principles in [man’s] nature, which interest him
in the fortune of others, and render their happiness necessary to him, though
he derives nothing from it except the pleasure of seeing it.” Smith and the
other classical economists had a conception of human nature that was remarkably multi-faceted; indeed, they did not draw a sharp line between psychology and economics the way we do.

Early neoclassical economics was built on the foundation of hedonic psychology: an account of individual behavior according to which individuals
seek to maximize pleasure and minimize pain. In W. Stanley Jevons’s words:
“Pleasure and pain are undoubtedly the ultimate objects of the Calculus of

5

===== PAGE 25 =====

6

Introduction

Economics. To satisfy our wants to the utmost with the least effort ... in other
words, to maximise pleasure, is the problem of Economics.” The early neoclassical economists were inspired by the philosopher Jeremy Bentham, who wrote:
“Nature has placed mankind under the governance of two sovereign masters,
pain and pleasure ... They govern us in all we do, in all we say, in all we think.”
Because it was assumed that individuals have direct access to their conscious
experience, some economists defended the principles of hedonic psychology
on the basis of their introspective self-evidence alone.

After World War II, however, many economists were disappointed with
the meager results of early neoclassicism in terms of generating theories with
predictive power and so came to doubt that introspection worked. Similar
developments took place in other fields: behaviorism in psychology, verificationism in philosophy, and operationalism in physics can all be seen as
expressions of the same intellectual trend. Postwar neoclassical economists
aimed to improve the predictive power of their theories by focusing on what
can be publicly observed rather than on what must be experienced. Instead
of taking a theory about pleasure and pain as their foundation, they took a
theory of preference. The main difference is that people’s feelings of pleasure
and pain are unobservable, whereas their choices can be directly observed.
On the assumption that choices reflect personal preferences, we can have
direct observable evidence about what people prefer. Thus, postwar neoclassical economists hoped to completely rid economics of its ties to psychology —
hedonic and otherwise.

In spite of the relative hegemony of neoclassical economics during the second half of the twentieth century, many economists felt that their discipline
would benefit from closer ties to psychology and other neighboring fields.
What really made a difference, however, was the cognitive revolution. In the
1950s and 1960s, researchers in psychology, computer science, linguistics,
anthropology, and elsewhere rejected the demands that science focus on the
observable and that all methods be public. Instead, these figures advocated a
“science of cognition” or cognitive science. The cognitive scientists were skeptical of naive reliance on introspection, but nevertheless felt that a scientific
psychology must refer to things “in the head,” including beliefs and desires,
symbols, rules, and images. Behavioral economics is a product of the cognitive
revolution. Like cognitive scientists, behavioral economists — though skeptical
of the theories and methods of the early neoclassical period - are comfortable
talking about beliefs, desires, rules of thumb, and other things “in the head.”
Below, we will see how these commitments get played out in practice.

To some, the fact that behavioral economists go about their work in such
a different way means that they have become economists in name only. But
notice that behavioral economics is still about the manner in which people
make choices under conditions of scarcity and the results of those choices for
society at large — which is the very definition of economics. Behavioral science
refers to the scientific study of behavior, which makes behavioral economics a kind of behavioral science. Psychology and economics is also a broader
category, referring to anything that integrates the two disciplines, and which
therefore does not need to be about choice at all.

===== PAGE 26 =====

Chapter 1 Introduction

1.3 Methods

Before we explore in earnest the concepts and theories developed by behavioral economists in the last few decades, I want to discuss the data that behaviotal economists use to test their theories and the methods they use to generate
such data.

Some of the earliest and most influential papers in behavioral economics
telied on participants’ responses to hypothetical choices. In such studies, participants were asked to imagine that they found themselves in a given choice
situation and to indicate what decision they would make under those conditions. Here is one such question: “Which of the following would you prefer?
A: 50% chance to win 1,000, 50% chance to win nothing; B: 450 for sure.” Other
early papers relied on readers’ intuitions about how people might behave
under given conditions. Thus, they offered scenarios such as: “Mr S. admires
a $125 cashmere sweater at the department store. He declines to buy it, feeling
that it is too extravagant. Later that month he receives the same sweater from.
his wife for a birthday present. He is very happy. Mr and Mrs S. have only
joint bank accounts.” These thought experiments were apparently inspired in
part by the author’s observations of the behavior of fellow economists, who
argued that people were always rational but at times behaved irrationally in
their own lives.

More recently, hypothetical choice studies were almost completely displaced by laboratory experiments in which laboratory participants make real
choices involving real money. Such experiments have been run for decades. In
the early 1970s, for example, psychologists Sarah Lichtenstein and Paul Slovic
tan experiments at a Las Vegas casino, where a croupier served as experimenter, professional gamblers served as participants, and winnings and losses
were paid in real money. More frequently, behavioral economists use college
undergraduates or other easily accessible participants. When behavioral economists engage in experimental studies, they can be hard to distinguish from.
neoclassical experimental economists, that is, neoclassical economists who
use experiments to explore how people make decisions. Experimentalists
agree that decisions performed by laboratory subjects must be real, and that
actual winnings must be paid out.

Behavioral economists, during the last decade or so, have increasingly
telied on data gathered “in the field.” In one famous field study, Colin F.
Camerer and colleagues studied the behavior of New York City cab drivers by
using data from “trip sheets” — forms that drivers use to record the time passengers are picked up and dropped off as well as the amount of the fares - and
from the cabs’ meters, which automatically record the fares. Researchers in
this study simply observed how participants behaved under different conditions. In field experiments, researchers randomly assign participants to test
and control groups, and then note how (if at all) the behavior of individuals
in the two groups differs. In one prominent field experiment, Jen Shang and
Rachel Croson tracked how voluntary donations to a public radio station varied when prospective donors were given different social information, that is,
information about how much other people had given.

7

===== PAGE 27 =====

8

Introduction

To some extent, behavioral economists use what psychologists call process
measures, that is, methods that provide hints about cognitive and emotional
processes underlying decision-making. Some rely on process-tracing software to assess what information people use when making decisions in games.
Others employ brain scans, typically functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI), which allows researchers to examine, albeit crudely, which parts of
an individual’s brain are activated in response to a task or decision. Imaging
methods have already been applied to a diversity of economic tasks, including decision-making under risk and uncertainty, intertemporal choice, buying and selling behavior, and strategic behavior in games. Even more exotic
neuroscience methods are sometimes employed. One recent study explored
what happens when you use a tool called Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
to disable a part of participants’ brains. The increasing use of methods borrowed from neuroscience is, not coincidentally, connected to the rise of neuroeconomics, which integrates economics with neuroscience.

The use of multiple methods to generate evidence raises interesting methodological problems. This is particularly true when evidence from different
sources points in slightly different directions. Sometimes, however, evidence
from multiple sources points in the same direction. When this is true, behavioral economists have more confidence in their conclusions. It can be argued that
part of the reason why behavioral economics has turned into such a vibrant
field is that it successfully integrates evidence of multiple kinds, generated by
a variety of methods.

1.4 Looking ahead

As stated in the Preface, this book is arranged in five main parts: (1) choice
under certainty, (2) judgment under risk and uncertainty, (3) choice under risk
and uncertainty, (4) intertemporal choice, and (5) strategic interaction. Each of
these parts contains two chapters: an even-numbered one outlining standard
neoclassical theory and an odd-numbered one discussing behavioral alternatives. A final part (6) concludes. As suggested in Section 1.1, the ultimate goal
of behavioral economics is to generate novel insights into people’s decisions
under conditions of scarcity and the results of those decisions for society.
Behavioral and neoclassical economists alike try to attain this goal by building abstract, formal theories. In this book we will explore increasingly general
theories, both neoclassical and behavioral.

Studying behavioral economics is a non-trivial enterprise. For one thing,
the level of abstraction can pose an initial challenge. But as we will see below,
it is the very fact that economics is so abstract that makes it so very useful:
the more abstract the theory, the wider its potential application. Some readers
may be prone to putting down a book like this as soon as they notice that it
contains mathematics. Please do not. There is no advanced math in the book,
and numeracy - the ability with or knowledge of numbers — is incredibly
important, even to people who think of themselves as practically oriented.

===== PAGE 28 =====

Chapter 1 Introduction

Exercise 1.3 Numeracy Ina recent study on financial decision-making, peo-

ple’s answers to three quick mathematics questions were strong predictors

of their wealth: households where both spouses answered all three questions

correctly were more than eight times as wealthy as households where neither

spouse answered any question correctly. So if you have ever struggled with

math, be glad that you did. You can try answering the three questions for

yourself:

(a) If the chance of getting a disease is 10 percent, how many people out of
1000 would be expected to get the disease?

(b) If five people all have the winning numbers in the lottery, and the prize is
2 million dollars, how much will each of them get?

(c) Let us say you have $200 in a savings account. The account earns 10 percent interest per year. How much would you have in the account at the
end of two years?

To underscore the usefulness of behavioral economics, the book discusses a
variety of applications. Among other things, you will learn how to choose
a wingman or wingwoman, how to design a marketing scheme that works,
how not to fall for such marketing schemes, how to compute the probability
that your love interest is seeing somebody else, how to sell tires, and how to
beat anyone at rock-paper-scissors. Ultimately, behavioral economics sheds
light on human beings —- the way they really are, as opposed to the way great
thinkers of the past have thought they should be — and on the nature of the
human condition.

FURTHER READING

Daniel Kahneman’s Thinking, Fast and Slow (2011) and Richard H. Thaler's Misbehaving:
The Making of Behavioral Economics are must-reads for anyone interested in behavioral
economics, both for their unparalleled understanding of the theory and for their illuminating personal reminiscences. Angner and Loewenstein (2012) and Heukelom (2014)
discuss the nature, historical origins, and methods of behavioral economics; Angner (in
press) explores further the relationship between behavioral and neoclassical economics.
The Wealth of Nations is Smith (1976 [1776]}; the quotations in the history section are
from Smith (2002 [1759], p. 211) and Smith (2002 [1759], p. 11), Jevons (1965 [1871],
p. 37), and Bentham (1996 [1789], p. 11). The sample questions in the methods section come from Kahneman and Tversky (1979, p. 264} and Thaler (1985, p. 199). The
psychologists who went to Vegas are Lichtenstein and Slovic (1973). The study of NYC
cabdrivers is Camerer et al. (1997), the one about social information Shang and Croson
(2009), and that which disabled parts of participants’ brains Knoch et al. (2006). Camerer
et al. (2005) provides a widely cited overview of neuroeconomics. The study on financial
decision-making is Smith et al. (2010); the three numeracy questions were adapted from
the University of Michigan Health and Retirement Study.

9

===== PAGE 29 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 30 =====

PART

Choice under
Certainty

2 Rational Choice under Certainty
2.1 Introduction

2.2 Preferences

2.3 Rational preferences

2.4 Indifference and strict preference

2.5 Preference orderings

2.6 Choice under certainty

2.7 Utility

2.8 Discussion

3 Decision-Making under Certainty

3.1 Introduction

3.2 Opportunity costs

3.3 Sunk costs

3.4 Menu dependence and the decoy effect
3.5 Loss aversion and the endowment effect
3.6 Anchoring and adjustment

3.7 Discussion

===== PAGE 31 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 32 =====

CHAPTER
Rational Choice under
Certainty

2.1 Introduction

As promised, we begin by discussing the theory of rational choice. This theory
forms the foundation of virtually all modern economics and is one of the first
things you would learn in a graduate-level microeconomics class. As a theory
of rational choice (see Section 1.1), the theory specifies what it means to make
rational decisions — in short, what it means to be rational.

In this chapter, we consider choice under certainty. The phrase “under
certainty” simply means that there is no doubt as to which outcome will result
from a given act. For example, if the staff at your local gelato place is minimally competent, so that you actually get vanilla every time you order vanilla
and stracciatella every time you order stracciatella, you are making a choice
under certainty. (We will discuss other kinds of choice in future chapters.)
Before discussing what it means to make rational choices under conditions
of certainty, however, we need to talk about what preferences are and what it
means to have rational preferences.

The theory of rational choice under certainty is an axiomatic theory. This
means that the theory consists of a set of axioms: basic propositions that cannot be proven using the resources offered by the theory, and which will simply
have to be taken for granted. When studying the theory, the first thing we
want to do is examine the axioms. As we go along, we will also introduce new
terms by means of definitions. Axioms and definitions have to be memorized.
Having introduced the axioms and definitions, we can prove many interesting
claims. Thus, much of what we will do below involves proving new propositions on the basis of axioms and definitions.

2.2 Preferences

The concept of preference is fundamental in modern economics, neoclassical and behavioral. Formally speaking, a preference is a relation. The following are examples of relations: “Alf is older than Betsy,” “France is bigger
than Norway,” and “Bill is worried he may not do as well on the exam as
Jennifer.” Notice that each of these sentences expresses a relationship between
two entities (things, individuals). Thus, “Alf is older than Betsy” expresses a
telationship between Alf and Betsy; namely, that the former is older than the
latter. Because these examples express a relation between two entities, they
are called binary relations. The following relation is not binary: “Mom stands

===== PAGE 33 =====

14 Partl

Choice under Certainty

between Bill and Bob.” This relation is ternary, because it involves three different entities; in this case, people.

For convenience, we often use small letters to denote entities or individuals. We may use a to denote Alf and b to denote Betsy. Similarly, we often use
capital letters to denote relations. We may use R to denote the relation “is
older than.” If so, we can write aRb for “Alf is older than Betsy.” Sometimes
we write Rab. Notice that the order of the terms matters: aRb is not the same
thing as bRa. The first says that Alf is older than Betsy and the second that
Betsy is older than Alf. Similarly, Rab is not the same thing as Rba.

Exercise 2.1 Relations Assume that f denotes France and n denotes Norway,
and that B means “is bigger than.”

(a) How would you write that France is bigger than Norway?

(b) How would you write that Norway is bigger than France?

(c) How would you write that Norway is bigger than Norway?

In order to speak clearly about relations, we need to specify what sort of entities may be related to one another. When talking about who is older than
whom, we may be talking about people. When talking about what is bigger
than what, we may be talking about countries, houses, people, dogs, or many
other things. Sometimes it matters what sort of entities we have in mind. When
we want to be careful, which is most of the time, we define a universe U. The
universe is the set of all things that can be related to one another. Suppose
we are talking about Donald Duck’s nephews Huey, Dewey, and Louie. If
so, that is our universe. The convention is to list all members of the universe
separated by commas and enclosed in curly brackets, like so: {Huey, Dewey,
Louie}. Here, the order does not matter. So, the same universe can be written
like this: {Louie, Dewey, Huey}. Thus: U = {Huey, Dewey, Louie} = {Louie,
Dewey, Huey}.

Exercise 2.2 The universe Suppose we are talking about all countries that
are members of the United Nations. How would that be written?

Auniverse may have infinitely many members, in which case simple enumeration is inconvenient. This is true, for instance, when you consider the time at
which you entered the space where you are reading this. There are infinitely
many points in time between 11:59 am and 12:01 pm, for example, as there are
between 11:59:59 am and 12:00:01 pm. In such cases, we need to find another
way to describe the universe.

One relation we can talk about is this one: “is at least as good as.” For
example, we might want to say that “coffee is at least as good as tea.” The “at
least as good as” relation is often expressed using this symbol: > . If c denotes
coffee and t denotes tea, we can write the sentence as c = t. This is the (weak)
preference relation. People may have, and often will have, their own preference relations. If we wish to specify whose preferences we are talking about,
we use subscripts to denote individuals. If we want to say that for Alf coffee
is at least as good as tea, and that for Betsy tea is at least as good as coffee, we

say thatc>,,tand t>,,,,.¢ or thatc>,tand t>,c.

===== PAGE 34 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty

Exercise 2.3 Preferences Suppose d denotes “enjoying a cool drink on a hot
day” and r denotes “getting roasted over an open fire.”

(a) How would you state your preference over these two options?

(b) How would you express a masochist’s preference over these two options?

In economics, we are typically interested in people’s preferences over consumption bundles, which are collections of goods. You face a choice of
commodity bundles when choosing between the #1 Big Burger meal and
the #2 Chicken Burger meal at your local hamburger restaurant. In order
to represent commodity bundles, we think of them as collections of individual goods along the following lines: three apples and two bananas, or
two units of guns and five units of butter. When talking about preference
relations, the universe can also be referred to as the set of alternatives. If
bundles contain no more than two goods, it can be convenient to represent
the set of alternatives on a plane, as in Figure 2.1. When bundles contain
more than two goods, it is typically more useful to write (3, 2) for three
apples and two bananas; (6, 3, 9) for six apples, three bananas, and nine
coconuts; and so on.

Bananas

0 1 2 3 Apples

| Figure 2.1 | Set of alternatives

2.3 Rational preferences

We begin building our theory of rational choice by specifying what it means
for a preference relation to be rational. A rational preference relation is a preference relation that is transitive and complete.

Arelation R is transitive just in case the following condition holds: for all
x, y, and z in the universe, if x bears relation R to y, and if y bears relation R
to z, then x must bear relation R to z. Suppose the universe is the set of all the
Marx brothers. If so, “is taller than” is a transitive relation: if Zeppo is taller
than Groucho, and Groucho is taller than Harpo, Zeppo must be taller than
Harpo (Figure 2.2).

15

===== PAGE 35 =====

16 Part 1

Choice under Certainty

The Marx brothers. Illustration by Cody Taylor

Example 2.4 30 Rock Consider the following exchange from the TV show
30 Rock. Tracy, Grizz, and Dot Com are playing computer games. Tracy always
beats Grizz and Dot Com. When Kenneth beats Tracy but gets beaten by Grizz,
Tracy grows suspicious.

Tracy: “How were you beating Kenneth, Grizz?”
Grizz: “T don’t know.”
Tracy: “Tf Kenneth could beat me and you can beat Kenneth, then

by the transitive property, you should beat me too! Have you
been letting me win?”

Dot Com: “Just at some things.”

Tracy: “Things? Plural?”

Now you are the first kid on the block who understands 30 Rock. You also
know that the show had a former economics or philosophy student on its
staff.

If the universe consists of all people, examples of intransitive relations
include “is in love with.” Just because Sam is in love with Pat, and Pat is in
love with Robin, it is not necessarily the case that Sam is in love with Robin.
Sam may be in love with Robin. But Sam may have no particular feelings
about Robin, or Sam may resent Robin for attracting Pat’s attention. It may
also be the case that Robin is in love with Sam. This kind of intransitivity
is central to the play No Exit, by the French existentialist philosopher JeanPaul Sartre. In the play, which takes place in a prison cell, a young woman
craves the affection of a man who desires the respect of an older woman,
who in turn is in love with the young woman. Hence the most famous line
of the play is: “Hell is other people.” To show that a relation is intransitive,

===== PAGE 36 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty

it is sufficient to identify three members of the universe such that the first is
related to the second, and the second is related to the third, but the first is
not related to the third.

Formally speaking, a preference relation > is transitive just in case the
following is true:

Axiom 2.5 Transitivity of > Ifx > y and y > z, then x > z (for all x, y, z).

There are other ways of expressing the same thing. We might write: If
x>y2z, then x>z (for all x, y, z). Using standard logic symbols, we might
write: x=y & y=z— x >z (for all x, y, z). See the text box on page 18 for a
useful list of logical symbols. Either way, transitivity says that if you prefer
coffee to tea, and tea to root beer, you must prefer coffee to root beer; that
is, you cannot prefer coffee to tea and tea to root beer while failing to prefer
coffee to root beer.

Arelation R is complete just in case the following condition holds: for any
x and y in the universe, either x bears relation R to y, or y bears relation R to
x (or both). If the universe consists of all people — past, present, and future —
then “is at least as tall as” is a complete relation. You may not know how tall
Caesar and Brutus were, but you do know this: either Caesar was at least as
tall as Brutus, or Brutus was at least as tall as Caesar (or both, in case they were
equally tall).

Given the universe of all people, examples of incomplete relations include
“is in love with.” For any two randomly selected people — your landlord and
the current President of the US, for example — it is not necessarily the case
that either one is in love with the other. Your landlord may have a crush on
the President, or the other way around. But this need not be the case, and it
frequently will not be. To show that a relation is incomplete, then, it is sufficient to identify two objects in the universe such that the relation does not
hold either way.

Formally speaking, a preference relation > is complete just in case the
following is true:

Axiom 2.6 Completeness of = Either x > y or y = x (or both) (for all x, y).

Completeness means that you must prefer tea to coffee or coffee to tea (or
both); though your preference can go both ways, you cannot fail to have a
preference between the two. The use of the phrase “(or both)” in the formula
above is, strictly speaking, redundant: we use the “inclusive or,” which is
equivalent to “and/or” in everyday language. Using standard logical symbols, we might write: x >y v y=x (for all x, y). If both x > y and y > x, we say
that there is a tie (see Section 2.4).

The following exercise serves to illustrate the concepts of transitivity and
completeness.

Exercise 2.7 Assuming the universe is the set of all people — past, present,
and future — are the following relations transitive? Are they complete?

(a) “is the mother of”

(b) “is an ancestor of”

17

===== PAGE 37 =====

18 Partl

Choice under Certainty

(c) “is the sister of”

(d) “detests”

(e) “weighs more than”

(f) “has the same first name as”
(g) “is taller than”

When answering questions such as these, ambiguity can be a problem. A word.
like “sister” is ambiguous, which means that answers might depend on how
it is used. As soon as the word is defined, however, the questions have determinate answers.

Exercise 2.8 The enemy of your enemy Suppose it is true, as people say,
that the enemy of your enemy is your friend. What does this mean for the
transitivity of “is the enemy of”? (Assume there are no true frenemies: people
who are simultaneously friends and enemies.)

Exercise 2.9 Assuming the universe is the set of all natural numbers, meaning that U = (1, 2, 3, 4, ...}, are the following relations transitive? Are they
complete?

(a) “is at least as great as” (=)

(b) “is equal to” (=)

(c) “is strictly greater than” (>)

(d) “is divisible by” (|)

Exercise 2.10 Preferences and the universe Use your understanding of

transitivity and completeness to answer the following questions.

(a) If the universe is (apple, banana, starvation}, what does the transitivity of
the preference relation entail?

(b) If the universe is {apple, banana}, what does the completeness of the preference relation entail?

Logical symbols
Here is a list of the most common logical symbols:

x&y xandy

xvy xory

xy ifxtheny;x only ify

xavy xifand only if y; xjust in case y
ap notp

As the last exercise suggests, the completeness of the preference relation
implies that it is reflexive, meaning that x >x (for all x). This result might
strike you as surprising. But recall that completeness says that any time you
pick two elements from the universe, the relation must hold one way or the

===== PAGE 38 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty

other. The axiom does not say that the two elements must be different. If you
pick the same element twice, which you may, completeness requires that the
thing stands in the relation to itself.

The choice of a universe might determine whether a relation is transitive or
intransitive, complete or incomplete. If the universe were U = {Romeo, Juliet},
the relation “is in love with” would be complete, since for any two members
of the universe, either the one is in love with the other, or the other is in love
with the one. (This assumes that Romeo and Juliet are both in love with themselves, which might perhaps not be true.) Perhaps more surprisingly, the relation would also be transitive: whenever x > y and y =z, it is in fact the case
that x > z.

The assumption that the weak preference relation is rational (transitive
and complete) might seem fairly modest. Yet, in combination with a couple
of definitions, this assumption is in effect everything necessary to build a theory of choice under certainty. This is a wonderful illustration of how science
works: based on a small number of assumptions, we will build an extensive
theory, whose predictions will then be confronted with actual evidence. The
test of this chapter spells out the implications of the assumption that the weak
preference relation is rational.

2.4 Indifference and strict preference

As the previous section shows, the (weak) preference relation admits ties.
When two options are tied, we say that the first option is as good as the second or that the agent is indifferent between the two options. That is, a person
is indifferent between two options just in case, to her, the first option is at least
as good as the second and the second is at least as good as the first. We use the
symbol ~ to denote indifference. Formally speaking:

Definition 2.11 Definition of indifference x ~ y if and only if x>y and
YF.

Using logical symbols, we might write: x ~ yooxu>y & y>x.

Assuming that the “at least as good as” relation is rational, the indifference
relation is both reflexive and transitive. It is also symmetric: if x is as good as
y, then y is as good as x. These results are not just intuitively plausible; they
can be established by means of proofs. (See the text box on page 23 for more
about proofs.) Properties of the indifference relation are established by the
following proposition.

Proposition 2.12 Properties of indifference The following conditions hold:
(i) x ~ x (forall x)

(ii) x~y—y~ x (forall x, y)

(iii) x~y &y~z>x ~ 2 (forall x, y, z)

19

===== PAGE 39 =====

20 Part1 Choice under Certainty

Proof. Each part of the proposition requires a separate proof:

(i) l.xex by Axiom 2.6

2x2 xaXEX from (1), by logic
Sa~X from (2), by Definition 2.11

(ii) l.x~y by assumption
2xey &yFx from (1), by Definition 2.11
3.yFx&xey from (2), by logic
Ay~x from (3), by Definition 2.11
Sa~ YY ~X from (1)-{4), by logic

(ii) l.x~y&y~z by assumption
2xey &yFx from (1), by Definition 2.11
3.yRz&ezey from (1), by Definition 2.11
A. xz from (2) and (3), by Axiom 2.5
5.z2x from (2) and (3), by Axiom 2.5
6.x~2Z from (4) and (5), by Definition 2.11

x~y&y~z>x~z ~~ from (1)46), by logic

These are the complete proofs. In what follows, I will often outline
the general shape of the proof rather than presenting the whole thing.

The indifference relation is not complete. To show this, it is enough to give a
single counterexample. Any rational preference relation according to which
the agent is not indifferent between all options will do (see, for instance,
Figure 2.3).

Exercise 2.13 Prove the following principle: x > y & y ~z > xz.

In your various proofs, it is always acceptable to rely on propositions you have
already established. The following exercise shows how useful this can be.

Exercise 2.14 Iterated transitivity In this exercise you will prove the follow-

ing principle in two different ways:x ~y&y~z&z~p—xXx~p.

(a) First prove it by applying the transitivity of indifference (Proposition
2.12(iii)).

(b) Then prove it without assuming the transitivity of indifference. (You may
still use the transitivity of weak preference, since it is an axiom.)

If you have difficulty completing the proofs, refer to the text box on page 23
for hints.

When a first option is at least as good as a second, but the second is not at
least as good as the first, we say that the first option is better than the second
or that the agent strictly or strongly prefers the first over the second. We use
the symbol > to denote strict or strong preference. Formally speaking:

Definition 2.15 Definition of strict preference x > y if and only if x>y
and it is not the case that y > x.

===== PAGE 40 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty

Using logical notation, that is to say: x > yx = y & sy > x. For clarity, sometimes the “is at least as good as” relation will be called weak preference.

Assuming (still) that the weak preference relation is rational, it is possible
to prove logically that the relation will have certain properties. The following
proposition establishes some of them.

Proposition 2.16 Properties of strict preference The following conditions
hold:

@ x>y&y>z7>x>z (forall x, y, z)

Gi) x>y > -7y> x (forall x, y)
(iii) not x > x (for all x)

Proof. (i) Suppose that x>y & y>z. In order to establish that
x >z, Definition 2.15 tells us that we need to show that x>z and
that it is not the case that z =x. The first part is Exercise 2.17. The
second part goes as follows: suppose for a proof by contradiction
that z>x. From the first assumption and the definition of strict
preference, it follows that x = y. From the second assumption and
Axiom 2.5, it follows that z> y. But from the first assumption and
the definition of strict preference, it also follows that -z>y. We
have derived a contradiction, so the second assumption must be
false, and therefore 7z > x.

(ii) Begin by assuming x > y. Then, for a proof by contradiction,
assume that y>x. Given the first assumption, Definition 2.15
implies that x > y. Given the second assumption, the same definition
implies that =x > y. But this is a contradiction, so the second assumption must be false, and therefore sy > x.

(iii) See Exercise 2.19.

Proposition 2.16(i) says that the strict preference relation is transitive; 2.16(ii)
that it is anti-symmetric; and 2.16(iii) that it is irreflexive.

Exercise 2.17 Using the definitions and propositions discussed so far, complete the first part of the proof of Proposition 2.16(i).

Notice that the proofs of Proposition 2.16(i) and (ii) involve constructing
proofs by contradiction. Such proofs are also called indirect proofs. This
mode of reasoning might look weird, but it is actually quite common in mathematics, science, and everyday thinking. For example, when mathematicians
prove that V2 is an irrational number, they can proceed by assuming (for a
proof by contradiction) that V2 is a rational number (meaning that V2 can
be expressed as a fraction p/q of natural numbers p and q) and then use this
assumption to derive a contradiction.

Exercise 2.18 The enemy of your enemy, cont. Use a proof by contradiction
to establish that “is the enemy of” is not transitive, as in Exercise 2.8 above.

21

===== PAGE 41 =====

22 Part 1

Choice under Certainty

In future exercises, you will see just how useful proofs by contradiction can be.

Exercise 2.19 Prove Proposition 2.16(iii). Prove it by contradiction, by first
assuming that there is an x such that x > x.

Exercise 2.20 Prove the following principle: x > y & y=z— x > z (forall x,
y, Z). Notice that this proof has two parts. First, prove that x > z; second, prove
that 42 > x.

Exercise 2.21 Establish the following important and intuitive principles.
(For the record, some of them are logically equivalent.)

(a) Ifx >ythenx > y

(b) Ifx > y then -y = x

(c) Ifx > ythen-y>x

(d) Ifx > y thenax~y

(e) Ifx~ythenax>y

(f) Ifax > y then y > x

(g) Ifax > y then y > x

(h) Ifax > y then y > x

If you run into trouble with parts (f) and (g), note that you can always play
the completeness card and throw in the expression x > y v y = x any time.
Also note that p v q and ~p implies that q. If you find part (h) difficult, feel
free to invoke the principle known as de Morgan’s law, according to which
a(p & q) is logically equivalent to =p v -q. Also note that p v q and p > q
implies that q.

For the next exercise, recall that it is acceptable to rely on propositions
already established (see text box below).

Exercise 2.22 Prove that if x ~ yand y ~ z, then 4x > z.

Exercise 2.23 Negative transitivity Prove the following two principles. You
might already have been tempted to invoke these two in your proofs. But
remember that you may not do so before you have established them.

(a) Ifax>y and -y>z, then7x>z

(b) If sx >yand -y >z, then ax >z

The last two exercises illustrate some potentially problematic implications of
the theory that we have studied in this chapter. Both are classics.

Exercise 2.24 Vacations Suppose that you are offered two vacation packages, one to California and one to Florida, and that you are perfectly indifferent between the two. Let us call the Florida package f and the California
package c. So f ~ c. Now, somebody improves the Florida package by adding
an apple to it. You like apples, so the enhanced Florida package f* improves
the original Florida package, meaning that ft > f. Assuming that you are
rational, how do you feel about the enhanced Florida package f* compared to
the California package c? Prove it.

===== PAGE 42 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty

How to do proofs

The aim of a proof of a proposition is to establish the truth of the proposition with logical or mathematical certainty (see the proofs of Proposition.
2.12(i)-(iii) for examples). A proof is a sequence of propositions, presented on separate lines of the page. The last line of the proof is the
proposition you intend to establish, that is, the conclusion; the lines that
come before it establish its truth. The conclusion is typically preceded
by the symbol .’.. All other lines are numbered using Arabic numerals.
The basic rule is that each proposition in the proof must follow logically
from (a) a proposition on a line above it, (b) an axiom of the theory, (c) a
definition that has been properly introduced, and/or (d) a proposition
that has already been established by means of another proof. Once a
proof is concluded, logicians like to write “QED” — Latin for “quod erat
demonstrandum,” meaning “that which was to be shown” — or by the
little box D1.

There are some useful hints, or rules of thumb, that you may want
to follow when constructing proofs. Hint one: if you want to establish
a proposition of the form x > y, you typically want to begin by assuming what is to the left of the arrow; that is, the first line will read “1. x by
assumption.” Then, your goal is to derive y, which would permit you
to complete the proof. If you want to establish a proposition of the form
x <> y, you need to do it both ways: first, prove that x — y, second, that
y — x. Hint two: if you want to establish a proposition of the form —p,
you typically want to begin by assuming the opposite of what you want
to prove for a proof by contradiction; that is, the first line would read
“1. p by assumption for a proof by contradiction.” Then, your goal is to
derive a contradiction, that is, a claim of the form q & =4, which would
permit you to complete the proof.

Exercise 2.25 Tea cups Imagine that there are 1000 cups of tea lined up
in front of you. The cups are identical except for one difference: the cup to
the far left (c,) contains one grain of sugar, the second from the left (c,) contains two grains of sugar, the third from the left (c,) contains three grains
of sugar, and so on. Since you cannot tell the difference between any two
adjacent cups, you are indifferent between c, and c,,, for all 1 between 1
and 999 inclusive. Assuming that your preference relation is rational, what
is your preference between the cup to the far left (c,) and the one to the far
Tight (C199)?

Your findings from Exercise 2.21 are likely to come in handy when answering
these questions.

23

===== PAGE 43 =====

24 Partl

Choice under Certainty

2.5 Preference orderings

The preference relation is often referred to as a preference ordering. This is so
because a rational preference relation allows us to order all alternatives in a
list, with the best at the top and the worst at the bottom. Figure 2.3 shows an
example of a preference ordering.

A rational preference ordering is simple. Completeness ensures that each
person will have exactly one list, because completeness entails that each element can be compared to all other elements. Transitivity ensures that the list
will be linear, because transitivity entails that the strict preference relation will
never have cycles, as when x > y, y > z, and z > x. Here are two helpful exercises about cycling preferences.

Exercise 2.26 Cycling preferences Using the definitions and propositions
discussed so far, show that it is impossible for a rational strict preference relation to cycle. To do so, suppose (for the sake of the argument) that x>y &
y>z &z> x and show that this leads to a contradiction.

Exercise 2.27 Cycling preferences, cont. By contrast, it is possible for the
weak preference relation to cycle. This is to say that there may well be an x, y,
and z such that x= y & y=z &z =x. If this is so, what do we know about the
agent’s preferences over x, y, and z? Prove it.

In cases of indifference, the preference ordering will have ties. As you may
have noticed, Figure 2.3 describes a preference ordering in which two items
are equally good. Assuming that the universe is {Heavenly Bliss, Coke, Pepsi,
Eternal Suffering}, this preference ordering is perfectly rational.

In economics, preference orderings are frequently represented using indifference curves, also called indifference maps. See Figure 2.4 for an example
of a set of indifference curves. You can think of these as analogous to contour lines on a topographic map. By convention, each bundle on one of these
curves is as good as every other bundle on the same curve. When two bundles
are on different curves, one of the two bundles is strictly preferred to the other.
Insofar as people prefer more of each good to less, bundles on curves to the
top right will be strictly preferred to bundles on curves to the bottom left.

Exercise 2.28 Indifference curves Represent the following sets of indifference curves graphically.
(a) Suppose that an apple for you is always as good as two bananas.

Heavenly Bliss
Y
Coke ~ Pepsi
Y
Eternal Suffering

| Figure 2.3 | Preference ordering with tie

===== PAGE 44 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty

Bananas

2

0 1 2 3 Apples

| Figure 2.4 | Indifference curves

(b) Suppose that one apple is always as good, as far as you are concerned, as
a banana.

(c) Suppose that you do not care for tea without milk or for milk without tea.
However, every time you have two units of tea and one unit of milk, you
can make yourself a cup of tea with milk. You love tea with milk, and the
more the better, as far as you are concerned.

2.6 Choice under certainty

To make a choice under certainty is to face a menu. A menu is a set of options
such that you have to choose exactly one option from the set. This is to say that
the menu has two properties. First, the items in the menu are mutually exclusive; that is, you can choose at most one of them at any given time. Second,
the items in the menu are exhaustive; that is, you have to choose at least one
of them.

Example 2.29 The menu If a restaurant offers two appetizers (soup and
salad) and two entrées (chicken and beef) and you must choose one appetizer
and one entrée, what is your set of alternatives?

Since there are four possible combinations, your set of alternatives is {soupand-chicken, soup-and-beef, salad-and-chicken, salad-and-beef}.

Exercise 2.30 The menu, cont. If you can also choose to eat an appetizer
only, or an entrée only, or nothing at all, what would the new menu be?

There is no assumption that a menu is small, or even finite, though we frequently assume that it is.

In economics, the menu is often referred to as the budget set. This is simply that part of the set of alternatives that you can afford given your budget,
that is, your resources at hand. Suppose that you can afford at most three
apples (if you buy no bananas) or two bananas (if you buy no apples). This

25

===== PAGE 45 =====

26 Part 1

Choice under Certainty

would be the case, for instance, if you had $6 in your pocket and bananas cost
$3 and apples $2. If so, your budget set — or your menu — is represented by the
shaded area in Figure 2.5. Assuming that fruit is infinitely divisible, the menu
is infinitely large. The line separating the items in your budget from the items
outside of it is called the budget line.

Exercise 2.31 Budget sets Suppose that your budget is $12. Use a graph to

answer the following questions:

(a) What is the budget set when apples cost $3 and bananas cost $4?

(b) What is the budget set when apples cost $6 and bananas cost $2?

(c) What is the budget set when apples always cost $2, the first banana costs
$4, and every subsequent banana costs $2?

So what does it mean to be rational? To be rational, or to make rational
choices, means (i) that you have a rational preference ordering, and (ii) that
whenever you are faced with a menu, you choose the most preferred item, or
(in the case of ties) one of the most preferred items. The second condition can
also be expressed as follows: (ii’) that ... you choose an item such that no other
item in the menu is strictly preferred to it. Or like this: (ii”} that ... you do not
choose an item that is strictly less preferred to another item in the menu. This is
all we mean when we say that somebody is rational. If you have the preferences of
Figure 2.3 and are facing a menu offering Coke, Pepsi, and Eternal Suffering,
the rational choice is to pick either the Coke or the Pepsi option. When there is
no unique best choice, as in this case, the theory says that you have to choose
one of the best options; it does not specify which one.

The rational decision can be determined if we know the agent’s indifference
curves and budget set. If you superimpose the former (from Figure 2.4) onto
the latter (from Figure 2.5), you get a picture like Figure 2.6. The consumer will
choose the bundle marked X, because it is the most highly preferred bundle
in the budget set. As you can tell, there is no more highly preferred bundle in
the budget set.

It is important to note what the theory of rationality does not say. The
theory does not say why people prefer certain things to others, or why they

Bananas

2

Budget line

0 1 2 3. Apples

| Figure 2.5 | Budget set

===== PAGE 46 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty

Bananas

2

0 1 2 3. Apples

| Figure 2.6 | Consumer choice problem

choose so as to satisfy their preferences. It does not say that people prefer
apples to bananas because they think that they will be happier, feel better, or
be more satisfied, if they get apples than if they get bananas (although that
may, in fact, be the case). This theory says nothing about feelings, emotions,
moods, or any other subjectively experienced state. As far as this theory is
concerned, the fact that you prefer a cool drink on a hot day to being roasted
over an open fire is just a brute fact; it is not a fact that needs to be grounded
in an account of what feels good or bad, pleasant or unpleasant, rewarding
or aversive. Similarly, the theory does not say why people choose the most
preferred item on the menu; as far as this theory is concerned, they just do.

Moreover, the theory does not say that people are selfish, in the sense that
they care only about themselves; or that they are materialistic, in the sense
that they care only about material goods; or that they are greedy, in the sense
that they care only about money. The definition of rationality implies that a
rational person is self-interested, in the sense that her choices reflect her own.
preference ordering rather than somebody else’s. But this is not the same as
being selfish: the rational individual may, for example, prefer dying for a just
cause over getting rich by defrauding others. The theory in itself specifies
only some formal properties of the preference relation; it does not say anything about the things people prefer. The theory is silent about whether or not
they pursue respectable and moral ends. Rational people may be weird, evil,
sadistic, selfish, and morally repugnant, or saintly, inspiring, thoughtful, selfless, and morally admirable; they can act out of compulsion, habit, feeling, or
as a result of machine-like computation. This conception of rationality has a
long and distinguished history. The Scottish eighteenth-century philosopher
and economist David Hume wrote: “'Tis not contrary to reason to prefer the
destruction of the whole world to the scratching of my finger. 'Tis not contrary
to reason for me to choose my total ruin, to prevent the least uneasiness of
an Indian or person wholly unknown to me. Tis as little contrary to reason
to prefer even my own acknowledge’d lesser good to my greater, and have a
more ardent affection for the former than the latter.”

Rational people cannot have preferences that are intransitive or incomplete, and they cannot make choices that fail to reflect those preferences.

27

===== PAGE 47 =====

28 Part 1

Choice under Certainty

2.7 Utility

The notion of utility, which is central to modern economics, has generated a
great deal of confusion. It is worth going slowly here. Suppose that you want
to use numbers to express how much a person prefers something, how would
you do it? One solution is obvious. Remember that a rational person’s preferences allow us to arrange all alternatives in order of preference. Consider, for
example, the preference ordering in Figure 2.3. The preference ordering has
three “steps.” In order to represent these preferences by numbers, we assign
one number to each step, in such a way that higher steps are associated with
higher numbers. See Figure 2.7 for an example.

A utility function associates a number with each member of the set of
alternatives. In this case, we have associated the number 3 with Heavenly
Bliss (HB). That number is called the utility of HB and is denoted u(HB). In
this case, u(HB) = 3. The number associated with Eternal Suffering (ES) is
called the utility of ES and is written u(ES). In this case, u(ES) = 1. If we use C
to denote Coke and P to denote Pepsi, u(C) = u(P) = 2. Because we designed
the utility function so that higher utilities correspond to more preferred items,
we say that the utility function u(-) represents the preference relation >.

As the example suggests, two conditions must hold in order for something
to be a utility function. First, it must be a function (or a mapping) from the set
of alternatives into the set of real numbers. This means that every alternative
gets assigned exactly one number. If Figure 2.7 had empty spaces in the righthand column, or if the figure had several numbers in the same cell, we would
not have a proper utility function. While the utility function needs to assign
some number to every alternative, it is acceptable (as the example shows) to
assign the same number to several alternatives. Second, for something to be a
utility function, it must assign larger numbers to more preferred alternatives;
that is, if x is at least as good as y, the number assigned to x must be greater
than or equal to the number assigned to y. To put it more formally:

Definition 2.32 Definition of u(-} A function u(-) from the set of alternatives
into the set of real numbers is a utility function representing preference relation >
just in case x > y > u(x) = u(y) (for all x and y).

A function u(-) that satisfies this condition can be said to be an index or a
measure of preference relation >. Historically, the word “utility” has been
used to refer to many different things, including the pleasure, happiness, and

Heavenly Bliss — 3
Y

Coke ~ Pepsi — 2
Y

Eternal Suffering — 1

| Figure 2.7 | Preference ordering with utility function

===== PAGE 48 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty

satisfaction of receiving, owning, or consuming something. Though most people (including economics professors) find it hard to stop speaking in this way,
as though utility is somehow floating around “in your head,” this usage is
archaic. Utility is nothing but an index or measure of preference.

Given a rational preference relation, you may ask whether it is always possible to find a utility function that represents it. When the set of alternatives
is finite, the answer is yes. The question is answered by means of a so-called
representation theorem.

Proposition 2.33 Representation theorem If the set of alternatives is finite,
then > is a rational preference relation just in case there exists a utility function
representing >.

Proof. Omitted.

When the set of alternatives is infinite, representing preference relations gets
more complicated. It remains true that if a utility function represents a preference relation, then the preference relation is rational. However, even if the
preference relation is rational, it is not always possible to find a utility function
that represents it.

As you may suspect, a utility function will associate strictly higher numbers with strictly preferred alternatives, and equal numbers with equally preferred alternatives. That is, the following proposition is true:

Proposition 2.34 Properties of u(-) Given a utility function u(-) representing
preference relation = , the following conditions hold:

@) x>ysu(x) > uly)

(ii) x ~ ys u(x) =u(y)

Proof. (i) First, assume that x > y, so that x>y and ~y> x. Using
Definition 2.32 twice, we can infer that u(x) = u(y) and that not
u(y) = u(x). Simple math tells us that u(x) > u(y). Second, assume that
u(x) > u(y), which implies that u(x) = u(y) and that not u(y) = u(x).
Using Definition 2.32 twice, we can infer that x > y and sy > x, which
in turn implies that x > y.

(ii) See Exercise 2.35.

Recall (from the text box on page 23) that if you want to prove something of
the form A B, your proof must have two parts.

Exercise 2.35 Prove Proposition 2.34(ii).

It is easy to confirm that the proposition is true of the utility function from.
Figure 2.7.

One important point to note is that utility functions are not unique.
The sequence of numbers (1, 2, 3) in Figure 2.7 could have been chosen
very differently. The sequence (0, 1, 323) would have done as well, as would
{-1000, —2, 0) and (—1,, e, 1077). All these are utility functions, in that they

29

===== PAGE 49 =====

30 Partl

Choice under Certainty

associate higher numbers with more preferred options. As these examples
show, it is important not to ascribe any significance to absolute numbers. To
know that the utility I derive from listening to Justin Bieber is 2 tells you absolutely nothing about my preferences. But if you know that the utility I derive
from listening to Arcade Fire is 4, you know something, namely, that I strictly
prefer Arcade Fire to Justin Bieber. It is equally important not to ascribe any
significance to ratios of utilities. Even if the utility of Arcade Fire is twice the
utility of Justin Bieber, this does not mean that I like Arcade Fire “twice as
much.” The same preferences could be represented by the numbers 0 and 42,
in which case the ratio would not even be well defined. In brief, for every given
preference relation, there are many utility functions representing it. Utility as
used in this chapter is often called ordinal utility, because all it does is allow
you to order things.

How do utilities relate to indifference curves? A utility function in effect
assigns one number to each indifference curve, as in Figure 2.8. This way, two
bundles that fall on the same curve will be associated with the same utility, as
they should be. Two bundles that fall on different curves will be associated
with different utilities, again as they should be. Of course, higher numbers
will correspond to curves that are more strongly preferred. For a person who
likes apples and bananas, u, <u, < u,.

How does utility relate to behavior? Remember that you choose rationally
insofar as you choose the most preferred item (or one of the most preferred
items) on the menu. The most preferred item on the menu will also be the item
with the highest utility. So to choose the most preferred item is to choose the
item with the highest utility. Now, to maximize utility is to choose the item with
the highest utility. Thus, you choose rationally insofar as you maximize utility.
Hence, to maximize utility is to choose rationally. Notice that you can maximize
utility in this sense without necessarily going through any particular calculations; that is, you do not need to be able to solve mathematical maximization problems in order to maximize utility. Similarly, you can maximize utility
without maximizing feelings of pleasure, satisfaction, contentment, happiness,
or whatever; utility (like preference) still has nothing to do with subjectively
experienced states of any kind. This is a source of endless confusion.

Bananas
2

1 Us

upg

uy

0 1 2 3 Apples

Im Figure 2.8 | atcticernem Indifference curves and utility

===== PAGE 50 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty 31

A final word about proofs

While the proofs discussed in this chapter may at first blush seem intimidating, notice that the basic principles are fairly simple. So far, we have
introduced only two axioms, namely, the transitivity of the weak preference relation (Axiom 2.5 on page 17) and the completeness of the weak
preference relation (Axiom 2.6 on page 17); three definitions, namely, the
definition of indifference (Definition 2.11 on page 19), the definition of
strict preference (Definition 2.15 on page 20), and the definition of utility
(Definition 2.32 on page 28); and two hints (see text box on page 23). In
order to complete a proof, there are only seven things that you need to
know.

2.8 Discussion

The first thing to notice is how much mileage you can get out of a small number
of relatively weak assumptions. Recall that we have made only two assumptions: that preferences are rational and that people choose so as to satisfy their
preferences. As long as the two assumptions are true, and the set of alternatives is not too large, we can define the concept of utility and make sense of
the idea of utility maximization. That is the whole theory. The second thing
to notice is what the theory does not say. The theory does not say that people
are selfish, materialistic, or greedy; it says nothing about why people prefer
one thing over another; it does not presuppose that people solve mathematical maximization problems in their heads; and it makes no reference to things
like pleasure, satisfaction, and happiness. The fact that the theory is relatively
non-committal helps explain why so many economists are comfortable using
it: after all, the theory is compatible with a great deal of behavior.

Though brief, this discussion sheds light on the nature of economics, as
some economists see it. Nobel laureate Gary Becker defines the economic
approach to behavior in terms of three features: “The combined assumptions
of maximizing behavior, market equilibrium, and stable preferences, used
relentlessly and unflinchingly, form the heart of the economic approach as I
see it.” Because this text is about individual choice, I have little to say about
market equilibrium. However, what Becker has in mind when he talks about
maximizing behavior and stable preferences should be eminently clear from.
what has already been said. In this analysis, preferences are stable in the sense
that they are not permitted to change over time.

Exercise 2.36 Misguided criticism Many criticisms of standard economics

are quite mistaken. Explain where the following critics go wrong.

(a) An otherwise illuminating article about behavioral economics in Harvard
Magazine asserts that “the standard model of the human actor — Economic
Man - that classical and neoclassical economics have used as a foundation.
for decades, if not centuries ... is an intelligent, analytic, selfish creature.”

===== PAGE 51 =====

32 Partl

Choice under Certainty

(b) Acommon line of criticism of standard economics begins with some claim
of the form “the most fundamental idea in economics is that money makes
people happy” and proceeds to argue that the idea is false.

Is this a plausible theory of human behavior under conditions of certainty? To
answer this question we need to separate the descriptive from the normative
question. The first question is whether the theory is descriptively adequate,
that is, whether people’s choices do as a matter of fact reflect a rational preference ordering. This is the same as asking whether people maximize utility.
Though both transitivity and completeness may seem obviously true of people’s preferences, there are many cases in which they do not seem to hold: a
person’s preference relation over prospective spouses, for example, is unlikely
to be complete. The second question is whether the theory is normatively
correct, that is, whether people’s choices should reflect a rational preference
ordering. This is the same as asking whether people should maximize utility.
Though transitivity and completeness may seem rationally required, it can be
argued that they are neither necessary nor sufficient for being rational.
Next, we explore what happens when the theory is confronted with data.

|| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 2.37 For each of the relations and properties in Table 2.1, use
a check mark to identify whether or not the relation has the property.

Table 2.1 Properties of weak preference, indifference, and strong

preference
Property Definition =~ >
(a) Transitivity xRy & yRz —xRz (for all x, y, z)
(b) Completeness xRy v yRx (for all x, ¥)
(c) _ Reflexivity xRx (for all x)
(d) _ Irreflexivity 7 xRx (for all x)
(e) Symmetry xRy— yRx (for all x, y)

(f) Anti-symmetry Ry —yRx (for all x, y)

Exercise 2.38 More properties of the preference relation Here are
two relations: “is married to” and “is not married to.” Supposing the
universe is the set of all living human beings, which of these is...

(a) reflexive

(b) irreflexive

(c) symmetric

(d) asymmetric

(e) anti-symmetric

===== PAGE 52 =====

Chapter 2 Rational Choice under Certainty 33

| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

Exercise 2.39 As part of your answer to the following questions, make
sure to specify what the universe is.

(a) Give an example of a relation that is complete but not transitive.

(b) Give an example of a relation that is transitive but not complete.

Exercise 2.40 Irrationality Explain (in words) why each of the characters below is irrational according to the theory you have learned in this
chapter.

(a) In the drama Sophie’s Choice, the title character finds herself in a Nazi
concentration camp and must choose which one of her children is to
be put to death. She is not indifferent and cannot form a weak preference either way.

(b) An economics professor finds that he prefers a $10 bottle of wine toa
$8 bottle, a $12 bottle to a $10 bottle, and so on; yet he does not prefer
a $200 bottle to a $8 bottle.

(c) Buridan’s ass is as hungry as it is thirsty and finds itself exactly midway between a stack of hay and a pail of water. Unable to decide
which is better, the animal starves to death.

FURTHER READING

A nontechnical introduction to decision theory is Allingham (2002). More technical
accounts can be found in Mas-Colell et al. (1995, Chapters 1-2). The paragraph from
David Hume comes from Hume (2000 [1739-40], p. 267). The Becker quotation is from
Becker (1976, p. 5). The Harvard Magazine article is Lambert (2006) and the critics
talking about happiness Dutt and Radcliff (2009, p. 8).

===== PAGE 53 =====

CHAPTER
Decision-Making under
Certainty

3.1 Introduction

The previous chapter showed how an extensive theory of choice under certainty can be built upon the foundation of a modest number of assumptions.
Though the assumptions may seem weak, their implications can be challenged both on descriptive and normative grounds. In this chapter, we confront the theory with data. We explore some of the phenomena that behavioral
economists argue are inconsistent with the theory of choice under certainty,
as we know it. We focus on a couple of different phenomena, beginning with
the failure to consider opportunity costs. Moreover, we will begin discussing
what behavioral economists do when they discover phenomena that appear
to be inconsistent with standard theory. In particular, we will discuss some of
the building blocks of prominent behavioral alternatives, including prospect
theory and the heuristics-and-biases program.

3.2 Opportunity costs

Imagine that you invest a small amount of money in real estate during a period
when it strikes you as a safe and profitable investment. After you make the
investment, the markets become unstable and you watch nervously as prices
rise and fall. Finally, you sell your assets and realize that you have made a
profit. “Wow,” you say to yourself, “that turned out to be a great investment!”
But when you boast to your friends, somebody points out that you could have
earned even more money by investing in the stock market. At some level, you
knew this. But you still feel that investing in real estate was a good choice: at
least you did not lose any money. This is a case where you may have been acting irrationally because you failed to consider opportunity costs.

In order to analyze this kind of situation, let us stand back for a moment.
An agent’s decision problem can be represented using a decision tree: a
graphical device showing what actions are available to some agent. Given that
you only have two available actions — buying stocks and buying real estate —
your decision problem can be represented as a decision tree (see Figure 3.1).
Because this chapter is about choice under certainty, I will pretend that there is
no uncertainty about the consequences that follow from each of these choices.
(We will abandon this pretense in our discussion of choice under risk and
uncertainty in Part 3.)

Suppose that you are tempted to buy real estate. What is the cost of doing
so? There would be an out-of-pocket or explicit cost: the seller of the property

===== PAGE 54 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 35

< ”
Buy real estate

Simple decision tree

would want some money to give it up. The real cost, however, is what you
forego when you buy the real estate. The opportunity cost — or implicit cost —
of an alternative is the value of what you would have to forego if you choose
it. In dollar terms, suppose that stocks will gain $1000 over the next year
and that real estate will gain $900. If so, the opportunity costs of buying real
estate is $1000 and the opportunity cost of buying stocks is $900. If you buy
teal estate, then, your economic profit will be $900 — $1000 = —$100. If you
buy stock, your economic profit would be $1000 — $900 = $100. If there are
more than two options, the opportunity cost is the value of the most valuable
alternative option. Suppose that you can choose between stocks, real estate,
and bonds, and that bonds will gain $150 over the next year. The opportunity
cost of buying stocks would remain $900, and the economic profit would still
be $100.

Exercise 3.1 Investment problem

(a) Draw a decision tree illustrating this decision problem.
(b) What is the opportunity cost of buying real estate?

(c) What is the opportunity cost of buying bonds?

Decision trees make it clear that you cannot choose one alternative without
foregoing another: whenever you choose to go down one branch of the tree,
there is always another branch that you choose not to go down. When you
vacation in Hawaii, you cannot at the same time vacation in Colorado; when
you use your life savings to buy a Ferrari, you cannot at the same time use
your life savings to buy a Porsche; when you spend an hour reading sociology, you cannot spend the same hour reading anthropology; when you are
in a monogamous relationship with this person, you cannot at the same time
be in a monogamous relationship with that person; and so on. Consequently,
there is an opportunity cost associated with every available option in every
decision problem.

For another example, imagine that you are considering going to the
movies. On an ordinary evening, the decision that you are facing might look
like Figure 3.2. Remember that the opportunity cost of going to the movies is
the value of the most valuable option that you would forego if you went to
the movies; that is, the opportunity cost of going to the movies is the greatest
utility you could get by going down one of the other branches of the decision
tree, which is the utility of the most valuable alternative use for some $10 and
two hours of your time.

As a matter of notation, we write 4,, 4,, ...,4, to denote the n different acts
available to you; u(a,), u(a,), ..., u(4,) to denote the utilities of those acts; and

===== PAGE 55 =====

36 Partl

Choice under Certainty

Go to the movies
Study for exam
Manage investments

Go to work

| Figure 3.2 | Everyday decision tree

c(a,), c(a,), -.., c(a,) to denote the opportunity costs of those acts. The opportunity cost c(a,) of act a, can then be defined as follows:

Definition 3.2 Opportunity cost
e(a,) = max {u(a,),u(a,), ...,u(a,_,),U(a,,,), ----u(a,)}-

This is just to say that the opportunity cost of act 4, equals the maximum utility
of the other acts.

Figure 3.3 represents a decision problem in which utilities and opportunity
costs of four acts have been identified. The number on the left is the utility; the
number in parentheses is the opportunity cost. You can compute the profit (in
utility terms) by subtracting the latter from the former.

Exercise 3.3 Opportunity costs This exercise refers to Figure 3.3. Suppose
that a fifth act (call it a,) becomes available. Assume that a, has a utility of 9.
(a) What would the tree look like now?

(b) What would happen to the opportunity costs of the different alternatives?

There is a tight connection between opportunity costs, utilities, and the
rational thing to do. As it happens, you are rational — that is, you maximize
utility —just in case you take opportunity costs properly into account.

ay, 7 (4)

a2 _.1 (7)
3(7)

a4
4(7)

_Mmaclicmemm Decision tree with utilities and opportunity costs (in parentheses)

===== PAGE 56 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 37

Proposition 3.4 a, is a rational choice <> u(a,) = c(a,)

Proof. We need to prove the claim both ways. The first part goes as
follows: assume that a, is the rational choice. Given our definition of
rationality, this means that u (a) = u (a) for all j #i. If so,

u(a,) = max {u(a,),u(a,), ...,u(a,_,),u(a,,,), -..,ula,)}

But because of the way we defined opportunity costs in Definition
3.2, this means that u(a) = c(a,). The second part is the same thing
over again, except reversed.

This proposition establishes formally what we already knew to be the case,
namely, that it is irrational to invest in real estate whenever there is a more
valuable alternative available, even if investing in real estate would generate
a profit. Notice that the condition holds even if there is more than one optimal
element. Whenever this happens, the utility of the optimal alternative will
equal its opportunity cost.

Example 3.5 Gangnam Style By mid-2014, the goofy music video ‘Gangnam
Style’ became the most watched YouTube clip of all time. According to a review
by The Economist, in the amount of time people spent watching the clip, they
could instead have built three of the largest type of aircraft carrier, four Great
Pyramids of Giza, six Burj Khalifas (the world’s tallest building in Dubai), or
20 Empire State Buildings. As this example shows, opportunity costs can be huge.

Exercise 3.6 Opportunity costs What is the opportunity cost of (a) staying in
an unfulfilling relationship, (b) pursuing a course of study that does not excite
you, and (c) sleeping until noon?

The concept of opportunity cost has considerable explanatory power.

Exercise 3.7 Opportunity costs, cont. Using the language of opportunity
cost, explain why highly paid people are less likely than poor people to mow
their own lawns, clean their own houses, maintain their own cars, and so on.

In practice, however, people frequently overlook or underestimate opportunity costs. In the context of investment decisions, many people are pleased
with their performance if their investments increase in value over time,
whether or not there is another investment that would have generated a larger
profit. Overlooking opportunity costs can make you behave in self-destructive
or otherwise suboptimal ways, as Exercise 3.6 shows. A person who ignores
the opportunity cost of a bad relationship, for example, could miss out on a
lot. If you were surprised by the opportunity costs of watching the ‘Gangnam.
Style’ video, chances are you underestimated them. Here is another example.

Example 3.8 Ignoring opportunity costs Imagine that after visiting your parents in Kansas a few times, you earn a voucher that can be exchanged for a

===== PAGE 57 =====

38 Partl

Choice under Certainty

free airplane ticket anywhere in the country. You decide to go to Las Vegas.
You would not actually have bought a ticket to Vegas, but because it was free
you figured you might as well. Now you would like to visit your parents in
Kansas, and wish you did not have to pay so much money for the ticket.

In this case, you may be acting irrationally because you did not consider the
opportunity cost of using the ticket to go to Vegas. Insofar as you would have
preferred to use the voucher to visit your parents in Kansas, you failed to
consider what you could have used it for instead. Though the ticket was purchased using a voucher rather than cash, the decision to use it to go to Vegas
is associated with a substantial opportunity cost. As this example illustrates,
people are particularly likely to ignore the opportunity cost of spending a
windfall, that is, an unexpectedly large or unforeseen profit. Yet the best way
to spend a dollar is not a function of how it ended up in your pocket.

What follows is a classic example. There are two different versions of this
question, one with the original numbers and one with the numbers in square
brackets.

Example 3.9 Jacket/calculator problem Imagine that you are about to purchase a jacket for $125 [$15], and a calculator for $15 [$125]. The calculator
salesman informs you that the calculator you wish to buy is on sale for $10
[$120] at the other branch of the store, located 20 minutes drive away. Would
you make the trip to the other store?

In the original study, 68 percent of respondents were willing to make the
drive to save $5 on the $15 calculator. Yet only 29 percent were willing to make
the drive to save $5 on the $125 calculator.

Here, many respondents seem to have failed to take opportunity costs properly into account. Standard theory requires you to make your decision based
on the opportunity cost of the 20-minute drive. The opportunity cost does not
depend on how you saved the $5. If people took the opportunity cost properly
into account, therefore, they would drive in the one scenario just in case they
would drive in the other. But that is not what we observe.

Exercise 3.10 Room service Suppose that you are staying at an expensive
hotel that offers in-room dining for $60. Ordinarily you would not pay that
kind of money for a meal, but you say to ourself: “I already paid $220 for this
room, so what’s $60 more?” Explain in what way your decision to pay $60 for
dinner ignores the opportunity cost of doing so.

In general, thinking about outcomes in terms of ratios is a good way to go
wrong. Asking questions such as “What’s another $10,000 when I’m already
spending $100,000 on a new house?” is one way to ignore the opportunity
costs of spending $10,000 that way. (We will return to the topic in Section 7.2.)

Exercise 3.11 Whateverittakes Politicians sometimes promise to do “whatever it takes” to eliminate poverty, defeat terrorism, etc. Use the concept of
opportunity cost to explain why that is not be the best idea.

===== PAGE 58 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 39

There are systematic data on how much money is lost by people who ignore
opportunity costs. Here is one example.

Example 3.12 One day at atime The field study mentioned in Section 1.3
found that New York City cab drivers who set their own hours ignore opportunity costs in a big way. The study found that cab drivers operate with a
daily income target, meaning that they will work until they have earned that
amount and then quit. The result is that they will work fewer hours on more
profitable (e.g., rainy) days, and more hours on less profitable (e.g., sunny)
days. This is exactly the opposite of what they ought to be doing, since the
opportunity cost of taking time off is higher on profitable days. The authors
of the study estimate that holding the total number of hours constant, drivers
could increase their earnings by as much as 5 percent by working the same
number of hours every day, and as much as 10 percent by working more on
more profitable days.

It is easy to think of other scenarios where people might ignore opportunity
costs. Think about unpaid work. Even if you can save money by mowing
your own lawn, this does not mean that it is rational to do so: if your hourly
wage exceeds the hourly charge to have a lawn care company mow your
lawn, and you have no particular desire to mow the lawn rather than spending another hour in the office, then the rational choice is to stay in the office
and pay somebody to mow your lawn. Or think about investments in public
safety. Even if recruiting more police officers might save lives, this does not
necessarily mean that it is rational to do so. If there is an alternative investment that would save even more lives — street lights, for example — or in
other ways generate more value, it would be irrational to recruit more police
officers. In general, even if some business move, political reform, or any other
initiative can be shown to have hugely beneficial consequences, this does not
automatically make it rational: everything hinges on what the opportunity
cost is.

Exercise 3.13 Advertising campaigns Your latest efforts to boost revenue
led to an advertising campaign that turned out to be hugely successful: an
investment of $1000 led to a $5000 boost in revenue. Does this mean that the
investment in the advertising campaign was rational?

Exercise 3.14 War or terror Imagine that a new terrorist group is threatening the lives of innocent civilians, and that all things equal, it would be a
good thing if the group vanished. Does this necessarily make it a good idea to
launch military action to destroy it?

Why do people ignore opportunity costs? The first thing to note is how very
difficult it would be to live up to the requirement to take opportunity costs into
proper account. The requirement does not say that you have to consciously
consider all the different alternatives available to you. But it does say that you
must never choose an alternative whose opportunity cost is higher than its
utility. This is an extremely demanding condition. Consider what would be

===== PAGE 59 =====

40 Partl

Choice under Certainty

required in order to rationally choose whom to marry. You must have complete and transitive preferences over all alternatives and you must make sure
that your choice of spouse is not inferior to any other choice. And the set of
alternatives in this case might include half of humankind or more, though for
many of us the budget set would be rather smaller. Hence, we should not be
surprised that people sometimes overlook opportunity costs. (Section 3.5 discusses another reason why people may fail to take opportunity costs properly
into account.)

Notice that it is irrational to fail to take opportunity costs properly into
account, given the account of rationality that we developed in the previous
chapter and use in this one. Certainly, in many cases this is right: if you fail to
consider the opportunity cost of using your free ticket to go to Vegas, for example, it might be acceptable to call you irrational. But the fact that considering all
possible alternatives is so very demanding — when getting married, for instance—
means that there can be legitimate disagreement about whether failing to consider opportunity costs under those conditions is irrational or not. And if it can
be rational to ignore opportunity costs, the theory that we have studied here is
normatively incorrect. Still, an awareness of opportunity costs can be helpful,
as Exercise 3.6 shows. Articulating what the opportunity costs of a given action
are can help you see other and better opportunities open to you.

It is important not to exaggerate people’s inability to take opportunity
costs properly into account. Although the opportunity cost of going to college
can be huge, since it includes the amount that can be gained from working
instead of studying, people still do go to college. Does this mean they are
irrational? Not necessarily. The opportunity cost of not going to college can
be even greater, since the foregone alternative in this case includes the higher
lifetime earnings that a college degree can confer. If so, going to college can
be perfectly rational in spite of the sizeable opportunity cost of doing so. (The
decision problem here - as in the case of investments in real estate and the
stock market — is complicated by the fact that it involves choice over time,
which is discussed further in Part 4 of this book.)

Problem 3.15 The opportunity cost of an economics education What
is (or would be) the opportunity cost, for you, of taking a course in behavioral economics? Upon reflection, is it (or would it be) worth it?

The notion of opportunity cost has other applications. According to psychologist Barry Schwartz, the fact that we face opportunity costs helps explain
why many of us are so unhappy in spite of the extraordinary freedom that we
enjoy. In this analysis, it is the very fact that we are free, in the sense of having
many options available to us, that prevents us from being happy:
[The] more alternatives there are from which to choose, the greater our experience
of the opportunity costs will be. And the greater our experience of the opportunity

costs, the less satisfaction we will derive from our chosen alternative... [A] greater
variety of choices actually makes us feel worse.

Schwartz calls it “the paradox of choice.” Notice, though, that this would be a
case where we pay too much, rather than too little, attention to opportunity costs.

===== PAGE 60 =====

Chapter 3— Decision-Making under Certainty 41

Notice that there are behaviors that need not result from a lack of attention to
opportunity costs, although it may look that way. When a person stays in a bad
telationship because he or she would rather deal with “the devil you know than
the devil you don’t,” the person is facing not just opportunity costs but also risk
or uncertainty — which is something we will return to in Part 3.

3.3 Sunk costs

Suppose that you are the manager of the research and development (R&D)
department of a big corporation and that you have to decide whether to spend
$1M to complete a project that, you are aware, is going to fail. In one scenario,
your corporation has already invested $9M in the project, and you have to
decide whether to invest the additional $1M required to complete it. In another
scenario, you have not yet invested anything in the project, and you have to
decide whether to invest the $1M required to complete it. What would you do?
You might be willing to invest in the first scenario but unwilling to do so in the
second. Assuming that the two decision problems are otherwise identical, this
would be irrational. And it would be irrational because you would be honoring sunk costs; you would, as people say, be “throwing good money after
bad.” One way to see this is to think of it in terms of opportunity costs: when
you make a decision based on sunk costs, you in effect ignore or underweight
opportunity costs — which is irrational (see the previous section).

Most decisions are not as simple as the decision trees we saw in Section
3.2. Some decision problems have several stages. Assuming that you want a
soft drink, for example, you may first have to decide where to get one. Thus,
you may have to choose, first, whether to go to Piggly Wiggly or Publix, and
second, whether to get Coke or Pepsi. While the fact that this decision problem has two stages complicates matters somewhat, decision trees allow you to
represent problems of this type too, as Figure 3.4 shows.

As always, the theory does not say whether you should choose Coke or
Pepsi. However, it does say a few things about how your choices in one part of
the tree should relate to your choices in other parts of the tree. Let us assume,
for simplicity, that your universe consists of these two alternatives only, and
that you are not indifferent between them. If you choose Coke rather than

. Coke
Piggly yo
Wiggly

Pepsi
#1

Coke

Publix Py

Pepsi

| Figure 3.4 | Multi-stage drinking problem

===== PAGE 61 =====

42 Partl

Choice under Certainty

Pepsi at node #2, you also have to choose Coke rather than Pepsi at node #3; if
you choose Pepsi rather than Coke at node #2, you also have to choose Pepsi
rather than Coke at node #3. As we established in Exercise 2.21(b) on page 22,
if you strictly prefer x to y, you must not also prefer y to x. And at #2 you are
indeed facing the exact same options as you are at #3. (If you are indifferent
between Coke and Pepsi, you can rationally choose either.)

Would anybody fail to act in the same way at nodes #2 and #3? There is a
wide class of cases where people do. These are cases in which there are sunk
costs: costs beyond recovery at the time when the decision is made. Consider
the R&D scenario outlined earlier in this section. It can be represented as
in Figure 3.5. Faced with these two problems, many people say they would
invest at node #2 but not invest at node #3. Yet, at node #2, the $9M is a sunk
cost: it cannot be recovered. Whether or not making the further $1M investment is worth it should not depend on whether you find yourself at node
#2 or #3. Failing to ignore sunk costs is referred to as honoring sunk costs,
or as committing the sunk-cost fallacy. The sunk-cost fallacy is sometimes
called the Concorde fallacy, since French and British governments continued
to fund the supersonic passenger jet long after it became clear that it would
not be commercially viable, supposedly because they had already invested
so much money and prestige in the project. As these examples illustrate, the
sunk-cost fallacy can be costly.

Example 3.16 The basketball game Imagine that you paid $80 for a ticket
for a college basketball game to be played about an hour’s drive away. The
ticket cannot be sold. On the day of the game, there is a freak snowstorm that
makes driving hazardous. Would you go to the game?

Now, imagine that the ticket instead was given to you for free. Would you
be more or less likely to go to the game?

Many people would be more likely to go to the game if they paid actual money
for the ticket. Yet the cost of the ticket is a sunk cost at the time when the decision is made. Whether or not you paid for the ticket should not affect whether
you go to the game or not.

The sunk-cost fallacy is evident in a wide range of everyday decisions. For
one thing, it can make people hold on to failed investments. If you refuse to

Invest $1M

Invest $9M

Invest $0
#1

Invest $1M
Invest $0

Invest $0

| Figure 3.5 | Multi-stage investment problem

===== PAGE 62 =====

Chapter 3 Decision-Making under Certainty 43

sell an underperforming asset on the basis that you would lose the difference
between what you paid for it and what you would get for it if you sold it now,
you are honoring the sunk cost of the original investment; the rational thing to
do is to hold on to the asset if you think it is the best investment available to
you right now and to sell if it is not. The sunk-cost fallacy can also make people
stay in failed relationships. If a friend refuses to ditch her current boyfriend,
even though she realizes that he is an utter loser, on the basis that leaving him.
would mean that she would have wasted some of the best years of her life, she
would be honoring the sunk cost of the time and effort that she has already
committed to him. As these examples show, honoring sunk costs can be expensive not just in terms of money, but also in terms of time, effort, and heartache.

Exercise 3.17 Sunk costs Draw decision trees for people who (a) hold on
to failed investments and (b) stay in bad relationships, in such a way that it
becomes clear that the people in question are committing the sunk-cost fallacy.

Note that the rational decision is determined by what is going on only to the
tight of the node where you find yourself. What happens in other parts of
the tree — in particular, to the left of your node — is completely irrelevant. In
this sense, rational choices are completely forward-looking. For as the ancient
Greek philosopher Aristotle noted some years back: “We do not decide to do
what is already past; no one decides, for instance, to have sacked Troy.” Things
that happened in the past matter only insofar as they affect future outcomes.

Example 3.18 Reading habits According to a survey administered by
Goodreads.com, 38.1 percent of readers say they will finish a book they started
reading no matter what — even if they hate it. This behavior can be understood.
as an effort to honor the sunk cost involved in buying and starting to read the
book.

Exercise 3.19 The fridge When cleaning out your fridge, you find some
food obviously rotting in the back. You have no trouble throwing away the
cheap mass-produced cheese somebody gave you, but you just cannot bring
yourself to toss the amazing cheese you brought back from Paris. So you put
it back in the back of the fridge, where it will sit for another couple of months
before it smells so badly you have no choice to get rid of it. How do sunk costs
figure in these decisions?

Exercise 3.20 Course selection Students at an expensive liberal arts college may take courses at a nearby public university at no additional charge.
One of their professors tells them that it would make no sense to do so, since
they would be losing the money they paid for tuition at the more pricey college. Given that a student has already paid tuition at the liberal arts college,
but judges that the course offerings at the public university are better for her,
where should she sign up? Explain.

The sunk-cost fallacy can start a vicious circle sometimes referred to as an
escalation situation. Once a project - whether an R&D effort, a marriage, a

===== PAGE 63 =====

44 Partl

Choice under Certainty

financial investment, or whatever — is beginning to go downhill, the sunk-cost
fallacy encourages people irrationally to make additional investments in the
project. Once the additional investment has been made, unless it turns the
project around, people find themselves with an even greater sunk cost, which
is even harder to ignore, thereby encouraging even greater investments.

Example 3.21 The F-35 The F-35 is the US military’s next-generation fighter
jet. Plagued with technical difficulties, the project was $160 billion over budget
already by early 2014. Critics argue that the project needs to be cancelled. But
the US Department of Defense (DOD) still wants its planes. “I don’t see any
scenario where we are walking back away from this program. We're going to
buy a lot of these airplanes,” the officer in charge of the program said to the
Fiscal Times. Why? “DOD is so far down the F-35 rabbit hole, both in terms of
technology and cost — $400 billion for 2,400 planes — that it has no choice but to
continue with the program.” You are unlikely to ever find a cleaner example
of the sunk-cost fallacy.

The sunk-cost fallacy and escalation behavior are often invoked when
explaining why the US spent so many years fighting a losing war in Vietnam.
According to this analysis, once soldiers were committed and started dying,
it became impossible to withdraw for fear that the dead would have “died in
vain”; thus, more soldiers were committed, more soldiers died, and it became
even harder to withdraw. Interestingly, the scenario was outlined as early as
1965 by George Ball, then Undersecretary of State. In a memo to President
Johnson, Ball wrote:

The decision you face now is crucial. Once large numbers of US troops are committed
to direct combat, they will begin to take heavy casualties in a war they are ill-equipped
to fight in a noncooperative if not downright hostile countryside. Once we suffer large
casualties, we will have started a well-nigh irreversible process. Our involvement will
beso great that we cannot — without national humiliation — stop short of achieving our
complete objectives. Of the two possibilities I think humiliation will be more likely
than the achievement of our objectives — even after we have paid terrible costs.

Some wars are justified and some wars are not. But the justification can
never take the form of simply pointing out how much money and how many
lives have already been sacrificed; if the war is justified, it must be for other,
forward-looking reasons. One important insight is this: before you embark on
a risky project, you may want to ask yourself whether it will be possible for
you to call it off in case it starts going downhill. If not, this is a reason not to
embark on the project in the first place.

An awareness of our tendency to honor sunk costs can be useful. The loser
boyfriend from earlier in this section can appeal to sunk costs when trying
to keep his girlfriend. Less obnoxiously, you can use knowledge of the sunkcost fallacy to market your products. One of the reasons why outlet malls are
located so far away from where people live is that executives want shoppers
to think of the sunk cost of a long drive to the mall as an investment that will
be lost if they do not shop enough. More upliftingly, it turns out that you can
make money by teaching people about rational-choice theory.

===== PAGE 64 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 45

Example 3.22 How to sell tires The following story was related by Cory, a
former student of behavioral economics:

I co-manage a local tire/automotive service retailer. Today, one of my good customers came into my store. He had purchased a set of tires from a separate online
tire seller and came to get them installed. Before we started working on his car, he
asked what other options would have been available to him. I proceeded to tell
him about a brand new tire that I stocked that was overall much better than the
one he bought — better traction features, better mileage, etc. I politely asked if he
would like to buy them and have me send the others back. His response was: “No,
that’s okay, I’ve already bought these. I better just stick with them.” I told him how
easy the return process would be, how much longer the new tire would last, how
it would save him money in the long run, etc., but his response remained the same:
“Already paid for these; better stick with them.” Finally, I told him that he was
honoring sunk costs.

So of course he asked what I meant, and I explained the concept at length. He
was simply fascinated by this random lecture that he was receiving from somebody
he thought to be just a “tire guy.” I concluded the conversation by humorously
declaring: “If you decide to stick with your original purchase, you are violating the
theory of rational decision-making.”

He then looked at me with a ponderous stare. “You know what? I learned a lot
from you. I think I will buy your tires and send the others back. Thanks for helping
me!” So he bought the tires from me, had them installed, and I made a nice commission. I thought to myself: “Wow, I have been finished with behavioral economics for
only one day, and already it is paying dividends!”

Knowledge of a tendency to honor sunk costs can also help us resist other people’s manipulative behavior. If you are the loser’s girlfriend, it might help to
remind yourself that the wasted years in your past are no reason to stay with
him, and if you are the shopper at the outlet mall, you can remind yourself
that the long drive out there is no reason to buy stuff you do not want.

Example 3.23 Bullet trains In 2011, California Governor Jerry Brown pushed
an effort to build a 520-mile high-speed railroad between the cities of Los Angeles
and San Francisco. However, since it is very expensive to build railroads where
people live, he hoped to start construction in a relatively remote and unpopulated part of the state. Why would he do this? According to critics, the New York
Times reported at the time, Brown calculated “that future legislatures would not
be able to abandon the project before it reached major population centers. ‘What
they are hoping is that this will be to high-speed rail what Vietnam was to foreign policy: that once you’re in there, you have to get in deeper,’ said Richard
White, a professor of history at Stanford University.” There is a good chance
politicians hoped that the sunk cost of the initial investment would start an
escalation situation that future administrations could not escape.

Notice that there are cases that may superficially look like the sunk-cost fallacy, but that really are not. In order for you to commit the sunk-cost fallacy in
a decision problem like that in Figure 3.5, the options available to you at nodes
#2 and #3 need to be identical. If they are not, you could rationally choose any
combination of options. For example, your boss might demote you for failing

===== PAGE 65 =====

46 Partl

Choice under Certainty

to invest at node #2 but not do so at node #3. If that is the case, it may well
be rational for you to invest at #2 but not at #3, even if the investment would
lead to large losses for the company. Similarly, if calling off a misguided military adventure would have unfortunate consequences — perhaps because the
national humiliation would be unbearable, the military would look weak, the
administration would look unmanly, and/or the next election would be lost -—
a president could rationally continue to fight the war. (Notice that we are concerned with rationality here, not morality.)

Either way, it is important not to accuse people of committing the sunkcost fallacy if their behavior is better captured by standard theory.

Problem 3.24 Revenge When wronged, many people feel a strong urge to take
revenge. Assuming revenge is costly, would not a revenge simply be a matter of
honoring the sunk cost of whatever injury they have already sustained? Or are there
conditions under which taking revenge can be rational?

3.4 Menu dependence and the decoy effect

Spend a moment considering which of the subscription offers in Table 3.1 you
would prefer. You will notice that there is something strange about the three
options. Why would anybody choose the print subscription, given that you
can get an online and a print subscription for the very same price? Given that
nobody in their right mind would choose option 2, why was it included? It turns
out that there is a good reason for The Economist to present potential customers
with all three options. When researchers presented MBA students with options
1 and 3 only, 68 percent chose option 1 and 32 percent chose option 3. When
the authors presented MBA students with options 1, 2, and 3, 0 percent chose
option 2. But only 16 percent chose option 1 whereas 84 percent chose option 3.
Thus, it appears that the inclusion of an option that nobody in their right mind
would choose can affect people’s preferences over the remaining options.
Recall from Section 2.6 that the rational choice depends on your budget set,
that is, your menu. When your menu expands, more options become available to
you, and one of them may turn out to be more preferred than the one you would
have chosen from the smaller menu. However, the theory from the previous
chapter does impose constraints on what happens when your menu expands.
Suppose you go to a burger restaurant and are told that you can choose between
a hamburger and a cheeseburger. Imagine that you strictly prefer a hamburger
and say so. Suppose, furthermore, that the server corrects herself and points out

Table 3.1. The Economist subscription offers

Economist.com offers Price
Option 1 Web subscription. $59
Option2 —_ Print subscription $125

Option3 _ Print + web subscription $125

===== PAGE 66 =====

Chapter 3 Decision-Making under Certainty 47

that there are snails on the menu as well. In this case, you can legitimately say
that you will stick with the hamburger, in case hamburgers rank higher than
snails in your preference ordering (as in columns (A) and (B) in Figure 3.6). Or
you can switch to snails, in case snails rank higher than hamburgers (as in column (C) in the figure). It would be odd, however, if you said: “Oh, I see. In that
case I’ll have the cheeseburger.” Why? No rational preference ordering permits
you to change your mind in this way. Either you prefer cheeseburgers to hamburgers, in which case you should have ordered the cheeseburger from the start,
or you do not, in which case you should not choose it whether or not there are
snails on the menu. (This chain of reasoning assumes that we are talking about
strict preference; if you are indifferent, you can choose anything.)

Formally speaking, the theory implies something we call the expansion
condition.

Proposition 3.25 Expansion condition If x is chosen from the menu {x, y},
assuming that you are not indifferent between x and y, you must not choose y from
the menu {x, y, z}.

Proof. If you choose x when y is available, given that you are not
indifferent between the two, you must strictly prefer x to y. If you
choose y when x is available, given that you are not indifferent
between the two, you must strictly prefer y to x. But we know from
Proposition 2.16(ii) on page 21 that the strict preference relation is
anti-symmetric; so this is impossible.

Plainly put, Proposition 3.25 simply says that the introduction of an inferior
product should not change your choice. The choice of y from the expanded.
menu would signal that you changed your preferences between the first and
second decision. The theory, however, does not permit you to change your
preferences as a result of an expanding menu or for any other reason. As we
know from Section 2.8, the theory assumes that preferences are stable and do
not change over time. The plausibility of the expansion condition can also be
seen by reflecting on the nature of indifference curves and budget sets. If some
option is optimal, given a set of indifference curves and a budget line, this fact
cannot be changed by adding another (clearly inferior) option to the budget
set. Thus, the introduction of another alternative inside the shaded area of
Figure 2.6 on page 27 would not make the alternative marked X suboptimal.

(A) (B) ()
Hamburger Hamburger Snails
Y Y Y
Cheeseburger Snails Hamburger
Y Y v
Snails Cheeseburger Cheeseburger

| Figure 3.6 | Preference orderings over food

===== PAGE 67 =====

48 Part1 Choice under Certainty

Yet there is evidence that people’s preferences do change when the menu
expands. We talk about this as a case of menu dependence. Suppose that you
market a product, which we call the target. The problem is that another company markets a similar product, which we call the competitor. The consumer
can afford each of these; both the target and the competitor are on the budget
line. The problem is that the consumer prefers the competitor. Thus, the decision problem facing the consumer looks like Figure 3.7(a). The two products
here (the target and the competitor) can be understood as before, as commodity

(a) Before the introduction of the decoy

(b) After the introduction of the decoy

===== PAGE 68 =====

Chapter 3- Decision-Making under Certainty 49

bundles consisting of so many units of apples and so many units of bananas.
They can also be understood as goods that differ along two dimensions: say, as
cars that differ along the dimensions of speed and safety. Either way, it should
be clear that the consumer in this figure will choose the competitor.

It turns out, however, that you can manipulate the consumer’s choices by
introducing a product that is in every respect inferior to the target. We say that
one product x dominates another y just in case x is better than y in every possible respect. In terms of Figure 3.7(a), the target dominates every product in the
boxes marked B and C. The competitor dominates every product in boxes A
and B. Given a menu and a good x, we say that a product y is asymmetrically
dominated by x just in case y is dominated by x but not by any other member
of the menu. Suppose, now, that the menu includes a third item, which we call
the decoy, and which is asymmetrically dominated by the target. This means
that the decoy is located in the box marked C in Figure 3.7(a). In spite of the
fact that few consumers would bother buying such a good - since it is in every
respect worse than the target — its introduction can change people’s choices.
There is evidence that the introduction of the decoy changes people’s indifference curves in the manner illustrated by Figure 3.7(b).

Notice that the indifference curves appear to have rotated clockwise
around the competitor, as it were, toward the decoy. As a result, the target
is now on a higher indifference curve than the competitor. Thus, in spite of
the fact that the rational consumer would not dream of buying the decoy, the
introduction of it still succeeds in changing people’s indifference curves and
therefore their choices. Because the presence of the dominated option appears
to increase the attractiveness to the consumer of the dominating alternative,
the decoy effect is sometimes referred to as the attraction effect. Notice that
such shifts violate the expansion condition (Proposition 3.25) and consequently are irrational.

Example 3.26 Speed vs. safety Imagine that you are in charge of selling a
car that is very fast but not very safe. Let us call it a “Bugatti.” (When people
complained about the poorly designed brakes of his cars, Mr Bugatti himself
is alleged to have said: “My cars are for driving, not for braking.”) The problem is that your customers too often choose a car that is less fast but more safe.
Let us call it a “Volvo.” To increase sales of your car, you decide to start selling
a decoy. What features should it have?

If you put speed on the x-axis and safety on the y-axis, you get a graph
exactly like Figure 3.7, in which the Bugatti is the target and the Volvo the
competitor. The decoy must go in the box marked C. The fact that the decoy
is below both target and competitor means that it is less safe than both the
Bugatti and the Volvo. The fact that the decoy is left of the target but right
of the competitor means that it needs to be less fast than the Bugatti but
faster than the Volvo. Notice that a vehicle that is inferior to both cars in both
respects — let us call it a “golf cart” - would not do the trick.

Exercise 3.27 Decoy effect For this question, refer to Figure 3.8.
(a) If you are in charge of marketing the target product, in what area would
you want to put the decoy?

===== PAGE 69 =====

50 Partl

Choice under Certainty

Competitor

Meeeicecnem Decoy effect exercise

(b) Assuming the decoy works as anticipated, does the figure show the indifference curves the way they look before or after the introduction of the decoy?

Exercise 3.28 Real-estate sales Suppose that you are a real-estate agent

showing two properties to potential customers. The one is in good shape but far

from the clients’ office; the other is only in decent shape but close to the office.

(a) If you want the customers to choose the former, what third property
should you show?

(b) If you want the customers to choose the latter, what third property should
you show?

Exercise 3.29 Third-party candidate Politician A has decided to run for political office on a platform promising lower taxes and cuts in public services. His
opponent B promises higher taxes and more funding for public services. All
things equal, the voters prefer low taxes and generous public services. Now,
Politician B is in the lead. Politician A decides to channel some of his campaign
funds to a third-party candidate, C, who will act as a decoy. What sort of platform must the third-party politician endorse to act as a decoy for A?

The following example is designed to show just how useful the study of
behavioral economics can be. Remember that with great power comes great
responsibility.

Exercise 3.30 Wingmen and wingwomen To improve your chances on the

dating scene, you have decided to recruit a wingman or wingwoman.

(a) How, in general terms, should you choose your wingman or wingwoman?

(b) Imagine that your attractiveness and intelligence are both rated 9 on a
10-point scale. You have two competitors: one whose attractiveness is

===== PAGE 70 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty

10 and intelligence 8; and another whose attractiveness is 8 and intelligence 10. In what range would you want your wingman or wingwoman’s
attractiveness and intelligence to fall?

(c) If somebody asks you to be his or her wingman or wingwoman, what
does this analysis suggest he or she thinks about your attractiveness and
intelligence?

How does this help us explain the subscription offers in Table 3.1? Each option
can be represented as a bundle of three different goods: online access, paper
subscription, and a low price. Thus, option 1 can be represented as (1, 0, 1)
because it includes online access, does not include a paper subscription, but
has a low price. Similarly, option 2 can be represented as (0, 1, 0) and option 3 as
(1, 1,0). From this way of representing the options, it is quite clear that option
2 is (weakly) asymmetrically dominated by option 3. If the analysis offered in
this section is correct, the introduction of the (inferior) option 2 might still drive
customers to option 3, which is what The Economist wanted and expected.

The decoy effect is only one form of menu dependence. Another effect that
has received a great deal of attention, especially in marketing literature, is the
compromise effect: people’s tendency to choose an alternative that represents
a compromise or middle option in the menu. The phenomenon is sometimes
described as resulting from extremeness aversion: a tendency to avoid options
at the extremes of the relevant dimension. A high-end brand might try to drive
business to their expensive products by introducing a super-expensive product; although the super-expensive product might never sell, it could make
the expensive product stand out as an attractive compromise between the
cheap and the super-expensive one. Low-end brands might try to do the same
by introducing super-cheap products. This may be how we got diamondstudded swimsuits on the one end of the spectrum, and swimsuits made out
of materials that degrade in the presence of sunlight, salt, and chlorine on the
other. Various forms of menu-dependence are sometimes described as context
effects, because people’s decisions appear to be responsive to the context in
which the decisions are made.

Exercise 3.31 Speed vs. safety, cont. Suppose that you want to harness the
power of the compromise effect to sell more Bugattis (see Exercise 3.26). What
sort of vehicle would you need to introduce to do so?

Exercise 3.32 Third-party candidates, cont. Suppose that politician A in
Exercise 3.29 above wanted to win elections instead by harnessing the power
of the compromise effect. What sort of platform must the third-party politician
endorse to have this effect?

How do we best explain the decoy effect and other cases of menu dependence? Perhaps consumers look for a reason to pick one option over another,
or to reject one of the options, in order to feel better about their decision. The
introduction of a decoy gives the consumer a reason to reject the competitor and to choose the target, in that the target no longer scores lowest along
either one of the two dimensions. The introduction of an extreme option gives

51

===== PAGE 71 =====

52 Partl

Choice under Certainty

people a reason to choose the option in the middle. Such considerations would
suggest that the search for reasons for action — or reason-based choice —- may
actually be responsible for making us behave irrationally. This is interesting,
because having reasons for actions is otherwise frequently seen as the hallmark of rationality.

Either way, menu dependence can explain a wide variety of marketing
practices, including why the number of options available to customers keeps
increasing (see the discussion of the paradox of choice in Section 3.2). And it is
obviously relevant to anybody who wants to sell things. Given the decoy and
compromise effects, it might make sense to introduce a product you do not
expect anyone to buy. For that reason, you cannot assess a product’s contribution to corporate profits by simply looking at the sales of that product.

Notice that there are cases that look like menu dependence but which may
be better described as something different. Suppose you enter a restaurant in
a part of town you do not know very well and are offered the choice between
fish, veal, and nothing at all. You choose the fish. Suppose, next, that the waiter
returns to tell you that the menu also includes crack-cocaine. It would be perfectly possible, at this point, to decide you would rather not have anything
at all without violating rational-choice theory. Why? When the waiter comes
back, he does not just expand your menu, he also tells you something about
the establishment — and also that you do not want to eat any of their food.
Notice that this is not even a case of choice under certainty. The decoy scenarios are different: in this analysis, it is not the case that you learn something
about the target by learning that the decoy is also on the menu.

3.5 Loss aversion and the endowment effect

The theory that we studied in the previous chapter makes preferences independent of your endowment, meaning what you have at the time when you
make the decision. Consider your preferences for coffee mugs (Figure 3.9).
Obviously, the theory does not tell you how much you should value the
mug. However, it does say a few things about how you must order mugs and
other things. Assuming you prefer more money to less, you prefer $1 to $0,
$2 to $1, and so on. Because of completeness, if you are rational, there must
be a dollar amount p (not necessarily in whole dollars and cents) such that
you are indifferent between p and the mug. If p is $1, your preference ordering can be represented as Figure 3.10. If you have the mug, and somebody
asks you what it would take to give it up, your answer would be “No less
than $1,” which is to say that your willingness-to-accept (WTA) equals $1.
If you do not have a mug, and somebody asks you what you would pay in
order to get one, your answer would be “No more than $1,” which is to say
that your willingness-to-pay (WTP) equals $1 too; that is, your preference
between the mug and the dollar bill does not depend on whether or not you
already have a mug, and your WTA equals your WTP. (Your preference for
a second mug might depend, however, on whether you already have a mug,
as Figure 3.11 shows.)

===== PAGE 72 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty

The value of a coffee mug. Illustration by Cody Taylor

The independence of your preferences from your endowment is reflected
ina fact about utility functions. Suppose your utility function over mugs looks
like Figure 3.11. The numbers on the x-axis represent how many mugs you
own, and the numbers on the y-axis represent how much utility they give
you. Thus, owning one mug gives you u(1) units of utility. When you move
from zero to one mug (rightwards along the x-axis), your utility increases from.
u(0) = 0 to u(1). Similarly, when you move from one to zero mugs (leftwards
along the x-axis) your utility decreases from u(1) to zero. Because the increase
in utility resulting from receiving the mug equals the decrease in utility resulting from losing it, the utility of the first mug is independent of your endowment, that is, whether or not you have the mug. We can show this numerically.
Suppose u(x) =3Vx, so that u(1) = 3 and u(0) = 0. If so, the amount of utility
received from acquiring your first mug (3) equals the amount of utility lost
when giving it up (3). Again, a second mug would increase your utility by a
smaller amount: u(2) — u(1) =3V2 —3V1 = 1.24.

$3
Y

$2
Y

$1 ~ mug
Y

$0

gcticemiem Preference ordering with mug

53

===== PAGE 73 =====

54 Part 1

Choice under Certainty

u(x)

u(2)

u(1)

0 1 2 x

| Figure 3.11 | Utility over mugs

However, people do not in general behave this way. Frequently, people
require a lot more to give up a cup when they already have one than they would
be willing to pay when they do not. In one study using Cornell University coffee mugs, the median owner asked for $5.25 when selling a mug, while the
median buyer was only willing to pay $2.25 to $2.75 to purchase one. This
phenomenon is referred to as the endowment effect, because people’s preferences appear to depend on their endowment, or what they already possess.
Since the manner in which people assess various options might depend on a
reference point — in this case, their current endowment — phenomena like these
are sometimes referred to as reference-point phenomena.

The endowment effect and reference point phenomena are instances of
framing effects, which occur when people’s preferences depend on how
the options are framed. There are many kinds of framing effects. In 2007, the
Associated Press reported that Irishman David Clarke was likely to lose his
license after being caught driving 180 km/h (112 mph) in a 100 km/h (62 mph)
zone. However, the judge reduced the charge, “saying the speed [in km/h]
seemed ‘very excessive,’ but did not look ‘as bad’ when converted into miles
per hour.” The judge’s assessment appears to depend on whether Clarke’s
speeding was described in terms of km/h or mph. Similarly, people traveling
to countries with a different currency sometimes fall prey to what is called
money illusion. Even if you know that one British pound equals about one
and a half US dollars, paying two pounds for a drink might strike you as better
than paying three dollars.

The endowment effect and other reference-point phenomena are typically
explained as the result of loss aversion: the apparent fact that people dislike
losses more than they like commensurate gains. When the Brad Pitt character
in Moneyball says “T hate losing more than I even wanna win,” that is loss aversion. It is reflected in the fact that many people are more upset when they lose
something than pleased when they find the same thing. Consider, for example, how upset you would be if you realized that you had lost a $10 bill, as

===== PAGE 74 =====

Chapter 3) Decision-Making under Certainty

compared to how pleased you would be if you found one. Adam Smith noted
this very phenomenon when he wrote “Pain ... is, in almost all cases, a more
pungent sensation than the opposite and correspondent pleasure.” Using the
language of framing, we will say that how much you value a $10 bill depends
on whether it is framed as a (potential) loss, as in the first case, or as a (potential) gain, as in the second case, and that losses loom larger than gains.

Example 3.33 WTA vs. WTP In the presence of loss aversion, your willingnessto-accept (WTA) does not in general equal your willingness-to-pay (WTP). When.
eliciting your WTA, you are asked to imagine that you have some good and to
state what dollar amount you would be willing to accept in order to give the
good up, meaning that the good will be evaluated in the loss frame. When eliciting your WTP, you are asked to imagine that you do not have some good and.
to state what dollar amount you would be willing to pay in order to acquire the
good, meaning that the good will be evaluated in the gain frame. Given that
losses loom larger than gains, we should expect your WTA to exceed your WTP.

As the example shows, loss aversion has radical implications for the practice
of cost-benefit analysis (to which we will return in Section 6.3). It is quite common to assess the value of goods by eliciting people’s willingness-to-accept
(WTA) or willingness-to-pay (WTP). The elicitation of WTAs and WTPs is particularly common in the case of public goods, like nature preserves, and other
goods that are not traded on an open market. As we saw earlier in this section,
standard theory entails that WIAs and WTPs should be more or less the same.
Loss aversion entails that people value something that they have more than
something that they do not have, meaning that we should expect their WTA to
exceed their WTP and such analyses to generate distorted results.

Behavioral economists capture loss aversion by means of a value function
v(-), which represents how an agent evaluates a change. The value function is an
essential part of prospect theory, which is one of the most prominent theories
to emerge from behavioral economics and to which we will return frequently
below (e.g., in Sections 7.2-7.3 and 7.6). The value function has two critical features. First, unlike the utility function, which ranges over total endowments, the
value function ranges over changes in the endowment. Second, the value function has a kink at the reference point — in this case, the current endowment -— in
such a way that the curve is steeper to the left of the origin: see Figure 3.12
for an illustration of a typical value function. Notice that in this picture the
vertical distance between the origin and v(—1) is much greater than the vertical distance between the origin and v(+1). Mathematically, |o(—1)| > |o(+1).
Again, this captures the fact that losses loom larger than gains, that is, that
people dislike losses more than they like the commensurate gains.

Another implication of loss aversion is that if you gain something and
then lose it, you may feel worse off even though you find yourself where you
started, which makes little sense from a traditional economic perspective.
Suppose your parents promise to buy you a car if you graduate with honors,
but after you do they reveal that they were lying. Figure 3.13 shows how you
might represent this change. By just looking at the picture, it is evident that
the gain of a car, v(+1), is smaller than the (absolute value of the) loss of a car,

55

===== PAGE 75 =====

56 Partl

Choice under Certainty

Im Figure 3.12 | Value function

v(—1). Thus, the net effect is negative: you will be worse off (in terms of value)
after you find out that your parents tricked you into thinking that you would
get a new car, than you would have been if they had not, even though you find
yourself with the same number of cars (zero).

Example 3.34 Toy Yoda In 2001, a Florida waitress working for an establishment that proudly describes itself as “tacky” and “unrefined” sued her
employer for breach of contract, alleging that she had been promised a new
car for winning a beer sales contest. The manager, the waitress said, had
promised her a “new Toyota” but when she claimed her prize, she found out
that she had won a “new Toy Yoda” - meaning a Star Wars figure. She was
understandably upset. Loss aversion explains why: being subjected to that
kind of prank leaves a person worse off than she was before, even if her total
endowment remains unchanged.

v(x)

| Figure 3.13 | Value function and the car problem

===== PAGE 76 =====

Chapter 3) Decision-Making under Certainty

It is possible to analyze loss aversion formally, by defining a value function
v(-) that is steeper for losses than for gains. For example, we can define a value
function along the following lines:

_ f x2 for gains(x = 0)
o() = { 2x for losses(x < 0)

It is easy to confirm that such a specification will generate graphs like
Figure 3.12. The next examples and exercises illustrate how the value function can be used in practice.

Example 3.35 Losses and gains Use the value function above to answer the

following two questions.

(a) What is the increase in value you would experience if you found $10?

(b) What is the decrease in value you would experience if you lost $10?

(c) In absolute terms, which is the greater number?

Here are the answers:

(a) When you go from your current endowment to your current endowment
plus $10, in terms of deviations from the existing endowment, you go from 0
to +10. In terms of value, this amounts to going from v(+0) = 0 to v(+10) =
10/2 = 5. The change is v(+10) — 0(0) = +5 — 0 = +5, meaning a gain of 5.

(b) When you go from your current endowment to your current endowment
minus $10, in terms of deviations from the existing endowment, you go
from +0 to —$10. In terms of value, this amounts to going from v(+0) = 0
to v(—10) = —20. The change is v(—10) — v(+0) 20-0 20, meaning a loss of 20.

(c) The absolute value of the loss (20) is greater than the absolute value of the
gain (5).

Notice two things about these calculations. First, to compute the change in
value, you want to compute the value of your endowment after the change
and subtract the value of your endowment before the change. And second, to
compute the value of an endowment, you must first express the endowment
as a deviation from your reference point and not in terms of absolute wealth or
anything of the sort.

Exercise 3.36 Toy Yoda, cont. Suppose that the same value function captures the waitress’s value function over cars in Example 3.34. What is the total
change in value she experiences after she gains a car and then loses it? Assume
that she incorporates it into her endowment and therefore adjusts her reference point immediately upon receiving the promise of a car.

Exercise 3.37 Having and losing In fact, it is possible to be worse off in value
terms even if you are better off in dollar terms. Working with the same value function, compute the net effect in value terms of gaining $6 and subsequently losing
$4. Assume that you incorporate the $6 into your endowment immediately.

If you do not incorporate the $6 gain into your endowment, and therefore do
not change your reference point before losing the $4, the net effect in value

57

===== PAGE 77 =====

58 Partl

Choice under Certainty

terms would be v(+6 — 4) = 0(+2) = 1. This phenomenon illustrates that it
matters how complex outcomes are bundled — a topic to which we will return
in Section 7.3

How you frame various outcomes and what reference point you choose,
whether you do so consciously or not, can have a huge effect on how you feel
about the outcome. The next example and exercises illustrate various applications of this idea.

Exercise 3.38 The bond market An ill-fated investment of yours in the junk

bond market just decreased from $1 to $0. Your value function is v(x) = x/2 for

gains and v(x) = 2x for losses.

(a) Suppose, first, that your reference point is $0. In value terms, how large is
the loss you just experienced?

(b) Suppose, instead, that your reference point is $1. In value terms, how
large is the loss you just experienced?

(c) Which framing makes you feel worse?

Exercise 3.39 The stock market Alicia, Benice, and Charlie own stock in the
same company. When they bought the stock, it was worth $10. It later rose to
$17, but then dropped to $12 before they sold it. The three are loss averse and
have the same value function: v(x) = x/2 for gains and v(x) = 2x for losses.

(a) Alicia uses the selling price ($12) as her reference point. If you ask her,
how much would she say that she lost in terms of value when the price
dropped from $17 to $12?

(b) Benice uses the peak price ($17) as her reference point. If you ask her,
how much would she say that she lost in terms of value when the price
dropped from $17 to $12?

(c) Charlie uses the buying price ($10) as her reference point. If you ask her,
how much would she say that she lost in terms of value when the price
dropped from $17 to $12?

(d) Who was more disappointed when the price dropped?

The key is to see that Alicia and Charlie evaluate the change as a foregone
gain, whereas Benice evaluates the change as an actual loss. Given that losses
loom larger than gains, Benice suffers more.

Exercise 3.40 Thievery A thief steals $100 from a victim. Let us suppose that

the thief and victim have the same value function over money: v(x) = x/2 for

gains and v(x) = 2x for losses.

(a) How much, in value terms, does the thief gain as a result of his robbery?

(b) How much, in value terms, does the victim lose as a result of the robbery?

(c) Assuming that it makes sense to compare the thief’s gain and the victim’s
loss, and ignoring any other consequences of the crime, what is the total
effect of the robbery in value terms?

(d) Does this suggest that crime is a force for good or bad?

Exercise 3.41 The tax cut Suppose Alex and Bob are loss averse, so that
their value function is v(x) = x/2 for gains and v(x) = 2x for losses. Because

===== PAGE 78 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty

of an upcoming election, politician R promises a tax cut which would give

each citizen an additional two dollars in his or her pocket every day. Politician

D opposes the tax cut. Ultimately D wins the election. Neither Alex nor Bob

receives the additional two dollars per day.

(a) Alex thought D would win the election and never thought of the additional
two dollars as part of his endowment. He thinks of the two dollars as a
foregone gain. What would he say D’s election cost him in terms of value?

(b) Bob was sure that R would win the election, and started thinking of the
two dollars as part of his endowment. He thinks of the two dollars as an
actual loss. What would he say D’s election cost him in terms of value?

(c) Who is likely to be more disappointed, Alex or Bob?

Loss aversion can explain a wide range of phenomena. For example, it can
explain why many companies have 30-day-no-questions-asked return policies. Although costly in other ways, such policies may serve to convince a
customer who otherwise would not make the purchase to take the product
home and try it out. Once taken home, however, the product becomes part of
the customer’s endowment and loss aversion kicks in, meaning that the customer is unlikely to return the product. Loss aversion serves to explain why
credit-card companies permit merchants to offer “cash bonuses” but prevent
them from imposing “credit-card surcharges.” Clients find it easier to forego
a cash bonus than to suffer the loss of a surcharge, so they are more likely to
use a credit card in the presence of the former than of the latter. Loss aversion helps explain why politicians argue about whether cancelling tax cuts
amounts to raising taxes. Voters find the foregone gain associated with a cancelled tax cut easier to stomach than they do the loss associated with a tax
increase. Consequently, politicians favoring higher taxes will talk about “cancelled tax cuts” whereas politicians opposing higher taxes will talk about “tax
increases.” Loss aversion can also explain why so many negotiations end in
stalemate, even in the presence of potential, mutually beneficial agreements.
Suppose two partners are negotiating the division of a pie and that both partners think they are owed two-thirds of the pie. Any division that strikes an
outside observer as fair (including a 50-50 split) will feel like a loss to both
partners, and an agreement might be hard to come by. Loss aversion can also
explain why the volume of real-estate sales decreases in an economic downturn. Sellers may find it so hard to sell their house at a loss, relative to the price
at which the property was purchased, that they would rather not sell it at all.
This kind of behavior even prevents people from upgrading from a smaller
to a larger property, which is economically rational to do during a downturn.

Exercise 3.42 Latte discounts Many coffee shops give customers a small
discount if they bring their own reusable mug. The coffee shops could equivalently lower all prices and add a small penalty to the bill of customers who do
not bring their own mugs. Yet, few coffee shops go for the latter solution. Why?

In addition, loss aversion helps account for some of the phenomena studied
earlier in this book, including the fact that people fail to take opportunity
costs properly into account. If people treat out-of-pocket costs as losses and

59

===== PAGE 79 =====

60 Partl

Choice under Certainty

opportunity costs as foregone gains, loss aversion entails that out-of-pocket
costs will loom larger than opportunity costs. Loss aversion may also help
explain why people are so prone to honoring sunk costs. Since a sunk cost
is often experienced as a loss, loss aversion entails that such costs will loom
large, which in turn might drive people to honor sunk costs.

So far, we have largely assumed that the reference point is determined by
a person’s current endowment. This is not always the case. A person’s reference point can be determined by her aspirations and expectations, among other
things. The fact that reference points can be fixed by aspirations and expectations
explains how people who get a five percent raise can feel cheated if they expected
a ten percent raise, but be absolutely elated if they did not expect a raise at all.

Exercise 3.43 Bonuses Draw a graph that illustrates how a person who gets
a five percent raise can be elated if she did not expect a raise at all, but feel
cheated if she expected a ten percent raise.

Exercise 3.44 Exam scores Assume that Alysha and Billy have the following value function over exam scores: 0(x) = x/2 for gains and v(x) = 2x for
losses. Both of them use the expected exam score as their reference point.

(a) Alysha expects to score 75 out of 100 on her upcoming midterm exam. She
does better than expected. What is her gain, in terms of value, if her final
score is 93?

(b) Billy also expects to score 75 out of 100 on his upcoming midterm exam.
He does worse than expected. What is his loss, in terms of value, if his
final score is 67?

(c) Insofar as you use your expectation as a reference point, what does value
theory seem to say about maximizing value in your life: should you perform well or poorly in exams? Should you set high or low expectations for
yourself?

The most spectacular example of the outsize role that expectations can play is
baseball player Barry Bonds:

When Pittsburgh Pirate outfielder Barry Bonds’s salary was raised from $850,000 in
1990 to $2.3 million in 1991, instead of the $3.25 million he had requested, Bonds sulked,
“There is nothing Barry Bonds can do to satisfy Pittsburgh. I’m so sad all the time.”

The Stoic philosopher Seneca diagnosed the problem about 2000 years ago. He
wrote: “Excessive prosperity does indeed create greed in men, and never are
desires so well controlled that they vanish once satisfied.” Behavioral economists use the term aspiration treadmill to refer to a process where increasing
endowments lead to rising aspirations. The result is that people like Barry
Bonds are nowhere near as happy with their $2.3 million salary when they
have it as they thought they would be before they started making that kind of
money. Thus, the aspiration treadmill is often invoked to explain the fact that
the marginal happiness of money is sharply diminishing.

The aspiration treadmill also has consequences for how we experience losses.
A model like that represented in Figure 3.11 suggests that a rich person who loses
money would experience a much smaller loss in utility than a poor person would.

===== PAGE 80 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 61

And yet, casual observation suggests many affluent people dislike, e.g., paying
taxes no less than poor people do. Seneca had a comment on this too:

For you are in error if you suppose that rich men put up with losses more cheerfully: the largest bodies feel the pain of a wound no less than the smallest ... You
may be sure that rich and poor men are in the same position, that their suffering is
no different; for money sticks fast to both groups, and cannot be torn away without
their feeling it.

Some people succeed in jumping off the aspiration treadmill. A 2006 story in
the New York Times described an internet entrepreneur who had just traded his
Porsche Boxster for a Toyota Prius: “‘I don’t want to live the life of a Boxster,
because when you get a Boxster you wish you had a 911,’ he said, referring to
a much more expensive Porsche. ‘And you know what people who have 911s
wish they had? They wish they had a Ferrari.’””

A person’s reference point can also be determined by other people’s
achievements or endowments. Such social comparisons help explain the fact
that whether a person is happy with his or her salary will depend in part
on the salaries of neighbors, friends, and relatives. In this respect, income is
similar to speed. Is 70 mph (110 km/h) fast or slow? If everybody else on the
highway is driving 50 mph, 70 mph feels fast. But if everybody else is driving
80 mph, 70 mph feels slow. Thus, your sense for how fast you are traveling
depends not just on your absolute speed, but on your relative speed. Similarly,
your sense for how much money you earn depends not just on your absolute
income, but on your relative income.

Exercise 3.45 Salary comparisons Insofar as you use other people’s salaries
as a reference point, what does value theory seem to say about maximizing
value in your life?

Example 3.46 Salary comparisons, cont. At one university library, there is
a single book that is so popular that it is chained to the checkout counter. You
would hope that it is some important medical reference work. But it is the
book that lists the salaries of all university employees. Presumably, no one
would use the book to look up one’s own salary: that information is more
easily accessible on one’s monthly pay stub. In all likelihood, the book is so
popular because people like to look up their colleagues’ salaries.

As the last example illustrates, it is hard to deny that people engage in social
comparisons. Social comparisons can also explain why bronze-medal winners can be more satisfied with their performance than silver-medal winners.
Assuming that a bronze-medal winner compares himself or herself with the
athletes who did not win a medal, the bronze medal represents achievement.
But assuming that the silver-medal winner compares his or her performance
with the gold-medal winner’s, the silver medal represents defeat.

Loss aversion has other, and perhaps even more radical, implications for
microeconomics. Because standard theory presupposes that preferences are
independent of endowments, it implies that indifference curves are independent of endowments. Thus, if your indifference curves look like those

===== PAGE 81 =====

62 Part1 Choice under Certainty

Bananas

1 2 3 Apples
(a) Without loss aversion

Bananas

1 2 3 Apples
(b) With loss aversion

| Figure 3.14 | Indifference curves and loss aversion

in Figure 3.14(a), they do so independently of whether you happen to possess bundle x or y. This indifference curve is reversible, in the sense that it
describes your preference over (actually, indifference between) x and y independently of your endowment.

By contrast, loss aversion entails that your indifference curves will not be
independent of your current endowment. Suppose, for instance, that your
value function is v(x) = x for gains and v(x) = 2x for losses, and that this is
true for both apples and bananas. If you begin with bundle y = (3, 1) and
lose an apple, you will require two additional bananas to make up for that
loss. Hence, the indifference curve going through y will also go through (2, 3).
If you start out with bundle y and lose a banana, you will require two additional
apples to make up for that loss. Hence, the very same indifference curve will
also go through (5, 0). The result is similar if you begin with bundle x = (1, 3).
If you are loss averse, then, your indifference curves will look like those in
Figure 3.14(b). Notice that there are two indifference curves here — really, two
sets of indifference curves — one for initial endowment x and one for initial
endowment y.

===== PAGE 82 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 63

Exercise 3.47 Value functions Suppose that you are loss averse, and that

your value function is v(x) = x for gains and v(x) = 3x for losses.

(a) Represent the value function graphically, in the manner of Figure 3.12.

(b) Represent your indifference curves graphically, in the manner of Figure
3.14(b), assuming that your initial endowment is (3, 4).

A feature of having kinks in your indifference curves — as in Figure 3.14(b) —
is that if you begin with x and are offered to trade it for y, you will reject
the offer. At the same time, if you begin with y and are offered to trade it
for x, you will reject this offer too. This phenomenon is sometimes referred
to as status quo bias, because you exhibit a tendency to prefer the existing
state of affairs under any circumstances. In the study of Cornell coffee mugs,
a median number of 2 out of 22 mugs changed hands when participants were
allowed to trade mugs for money; in the absence of status quo bias, one would
expect the number of trades to equal about 11. This result is important among
other things because it appears at odds with what has come to be known as
the Coase Theorem. Loosely speaking, the theorem says that in the absence
of transaction costs, bargaining will lead to an efficient allocation. But to the
extent that people exhibit status quo bias, they may fail to reach an efficient
bargaining solution even when transactions costs are zero.

Exercise 3.48 Health care Broadly speaking, in Europe, health care is provided by the government and paid for by taxes. That is, individuals are taxed
by the government, which then uses the tax money to provide health care
services for the citizens. In the US, again broadly speaking, health care is
largely purchased privately. That is, individuals pay lower taxes, and (if they
so choose) use their money to purchase health care services.

(a) Use the notion of status quo bias to provide a detailed explanation of the
following paradox: most Americans prefer their system to a European-style
one, whereas most Europeans prefer their system to an American-style one.

(b) Illustrate your answer with a graph showing the indifference curves of a
typical American and a typical European.

(c) Imagine that the US were to adopt a European-style health-care system.
How should we expect Americans to feel about their new health-care system then, and how easy would it be for the opposition party to switch back?

Exercise 3.49 Affordable Care Act Writing in the Washington Examiner in
July of 2013, Byron York explained why Democrats were so eager to implement the Affordable Care Act, a.k.a. Obamacare, which aims to provide health
insurance for otherwise uninsured Americans:

Obamacare is designed to increase the number of Americans who depend on the
government to pay for health insurance ... In all, the government will be transferring hundreds of billions of dollars to Americans for health coverage. The White
House knows that once those payments begin, repealing Obamacare will no longer
be an abstract question of removing legislation not yet in effect. Instead, it will be a
very real matter of taking money away from people. It’s very, very hard to do that.

What principle does this insight embody?

===== PAGE 83 =====

64 Partl

Choice under Certainty

Exercise 3.50 Milton and Rose Friedman Nobel laureate Milton Friedman

and Rose Friedman famously wrote: “Nothing is so permanent as a temporary

government program.”

(a) Use the concept of loss aversion to explain why supposedly temporary government programs have a tendency to last longer than originally intended.

(b) Some government programs now come with a sunset provision, which
states that the law will be cancelled after a specific date. Explain how such
provisions aim to solve the problem you identified under (a).

For better or worse, loss aversion and status quo bias make it rational for those
who want to see expanded government programs to push ahead even with
imperfect proposals, since it is easier to fix a flawed program later than it is
to enact it in the first place. Loss aversion and status quo bias also make it
rational for people who oppose them to aggressively resist any expansion,
since it is very difficult to go back once a program is in place.

Status quo bias can be a real obstacle not only to sensible policies, but also
to personal growth.

Example 3.51 Clutter While many people across the world continue to
struggle to meet fundamental needs, more and more people in the developed
world have the opposite problem: too much stuff. Although American homes
have grown dramatically over the last 50 years or so, the amount of stuff people own has increased even faster. Consequently, the self-storage industry
brags that it is one of the fastest-growing sectors of commercial real estate,
bringing in more than $24 billion annually in the US alone. There is an entire
body of self-help literature advising people to get rid of clutter in exchange for
simplicity, happiness, and peace of mind, signifying both that people want to
do so and that they are unable to. Why is decluttering so hard?

Loss aversion makes the gain of simplicity, happiness, and peace of mind
seem small relative to the loss of all that stuff — prompting people to forgo the
former in order to avoid the latter. The result is that people are biased in favor of
the status quo, even when they acknowledge that it is inferior. The good news is
that it may be possible to hack your mind by framing the decisions differently. If
itis hard to get rid of that collection of VHS tapes you inherited, do not ask yourself, “Can I throw this away?” Instead, ask yourself, “If I didn’t already own
this, would I buy it?” If the answer is no, you know what to do. Or, if it is hard
to get rid of half of your CD collection, do not ask yourself, “Which CDs should
I throw away?” Instead, tell yourself that you are going to get rid of the entire
collection and then ask yourself, “Which CDs should I keep?” Chances are it
will be an easier process when the decision to declutter is not framed as a loss.

Status quo bias can explain why many people oppose human genetic enhancement. Many of us would be unwilling to give up our natural, pristine “unenhanced” state in exchange for an increase in intelligence quotient (IQ); yet, if
we were the beneficiaries of genetic enhancement, it is hard to imagine that
we would willingly accept a decrease in IQ in exchange for the natural, pristine “unenhanced” state. Also, status quo bias explains why many people

===== PAGE 84 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 65

oppose free trade when they do not have it but are in favor of it when they
do. Many people who hesitate to support free-trade agreements with other
countries (with which they do not already trade freely) would protest loudly
if somebody proposed eliminating free-trade agreements already in existence,
for example, with adjoining states and regions. In all these cases, people are
unmoved by the prospect of gaining a benefit that they do not already have,
but deeply averse to losing some benefit that they already have.

Loss aversion must not be confused with diminishing marginal utility. If
people would be willing to pay less for a mug that they do not own than they
would accept in return for the mug that they do own, this may reflect diminishing marginal utility for mugs. Going back to Figure 3.11, notice that the
utility derived from the second mug (that is, the marginal utility of the second
mug) is much lower than the utility derived from the first mug. It is important
not to attribute loss aversion to agents whose behavior is better explained in
terms of diminishing marginal utility.

3.6 Anchoring and adjustment

Imagine that you subject people to the following two experiments. If your
research participants protest that they do not know the answers to the questions, tell them to offer their best guesses.

Example 3.52 Africa and the UN Spin a wheel of fortune to come up with a

number between 0 and 100, and invite your participants to answer the follow-

ing two questions:

(a) Is the percentage of African nations in the United Nations (UN) greater
than or less than the number?

(b) What is the actual percentage of African nations in the UN?

You probably would not expect the answer to (b) to reflect the random
number generated by the wheel of fortune. Yet evidence suggests that you
would find a correlation between the two. In one study, when the starting
point was 10, the median answer to (b) was 25; when the starting point was
65, the median answer was 45.

Example 3.53 Multiplication Give people 5 seconds to come up with an
answer to either one of the following multiplication problems:
(a) Compute: 1#2%*3%4*5*6%7%*8
(b) Compute: 8 #7*6*5*4*3%2%1

Given that (a) and (b) are mathematically equivalent, you might expect your
research participants to come up with more or less the same answer independently
of which question they were asked. Yet, when a group of high school students
were asked the first question, the median answer was 512; when they were asked.
the second question, the median answer was 2250. (The correct answer is 40,320.)

These phenomena are frequently explained by reference to anchoring and
adjustment, which is a cognitive process that can be used when forming judgments. As the name suggests, anchoring and adjustment is a two-stage process:

===== PAGE 85 =====

66 Partl

Choice under Certainty

first, you pick an initial estimate called an anchor, and second, you adjust the
initial estimate up or down (as you see fit) in order to come up with a final
answer. When deciding what a used car with a $15k price tag is worth, for example, you might start by asking yourself whether it is worth $15k and then adjust
your estimate as required. If you think $15k is too much, you adjust your estimate of its worth downward; if you think $15k is too little, you adjust it upward.

According to one prominent account of human judgment and decisionmaking — the heuristics-and-biases program — we make judgments not by
actually computing probabilities and utilities but by following heuristics.
Thus, a heuristic is a rule of thumb or mental shortcut that can be used when
forming judgments. Heuristics are thought to be functional, in the sense that
they reduce the time and effort required to solve everyday problems and produce approximately correct answers under a wide range of conditions. But
they are not assumed to be perfect: under certain circumstances, they are
thought to fail in predictable fashion. Because the consistent application of a
heuristic can lead to answers that are systematically and predictably wrong,
we say that it can lead to bias. Thus, an account according to which we follow
heuristics can help explain both why we oftentimes are able to make quick
and perfectly appropriate judgments, and why we sometimes go wrong.

Anchoring and adjustment is one of the heuristics identified by the heuristics-and-biases program. Like all heuristics, anchoring and adjustment is
thought to be functional but at the same time lead to bias under certain conditions. Evidence suggests that the adjustment is often insufficient. This means
that the final judgment will to some extent be a function of the anchor, which
may be perfectly arbitrary. If the anchor is very different from the true answer,
anchoring and insufficient adjustment can generate highly inaccurate answers.

Consider Example 3.52. People’s answer to the question about the percentage of African nations in the UN can be explained by saying that they take the
random number as an anchor and adjust the answer up or down as they see
fit. If the random number is 65, they begin with 65, then (assuming this number strikes them as too high) adjust downward. If, instead, the random number is 10, then (assuming this strikes them as too low) they adjust upward.
Insofar as the adjustment is insufficient, we should expect the final estimate to
be higher if the random number is 65 than if it is 10.

Consider Example 3.53. Under time pressure, students presumably perform a few steps of the multiplication problem (as time allows) and adjust
upward to compensate for the missing steps. Insofar as the adjustment is
insufficient, you would expect the answers to be too low. Moreover, because
people who answer (a) will get a lower number after a few steps than people
who answer (b), you would expect the former to offer a lower estimate than
the latter. As you can tell, this is exactly what happened.

Anchoring and adjustment might affect a wide range of judgments.
Consider the following famous story.

Exercise 3.54 Inventionofchess According to legend, the inventor of chess was
asked by the emperor what he (the inventor) wanted in return for his invention.
The inventor responded: “One grain of rice for the first square on the chess-board,
two grains for the second square, four grains for the third square, and so on.”

===== PAGE 86 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 67

The emperor was happy to oblige. There are 64 squares on the chess board, so on.
the 64th day, the inventor could demand 21 = 10'° = 10,000,000,000,000,000,000
grains of rice, a figure much greater than what the emperor had expected and
could afford. Use the idea of anchoring and adjustment to explain how the
emperor could underestimate the number so dramatically.

So far we have talked about anchoring and adjustment as something that
affects belief, but there is evidence that it also affects preferences. In one study,
experimenters showed MBA students various products, and asked them, first,
whether they would be willing to buy the product for a price equal to the last
two digits of their social security number, and second, to state their WTP. When.
people in the lowest quintile (the lowest 20 percent of the distribution with
respect to social security numbers) were willing to pay $8.64 on the mean for
a cordless trackball, people in the highest quintile were willing to pay $26.18.
When people in the lowest quintile were willing to pay $11.73 for a bottle of
fine wine, people in the highest quintile were willing to pay $37.55. Thus, people in the highest quintile were sometimes willing to pay more than three times
as much as people in the lowest quintile. These results are easily explained by
anchoring and (insufficient) adjustment, if we assume that the study participants used the last two digits of their social security number as an anchor.

From the discussion at the beginning of Section 3.5, it should be clear why
this behavior pattern is irrational. The behavior pattern can be said to violate
procedure invariance: the proposition that a stated preference should not differ depending on the method used to elicit it.

Anchoring and adjustment can explain a whole range of phenomena. It
can explain, for instance, why it is so common to lure customers by lines such
as these: “Used to be $50! Now only $24.99!” or “A $500 value for only $399”
or “Suggested retail price: $14.99. Now, only $9.99.” Sellers might hope that
potential customers will form a judgment about the dollar value of the product by using the first amount as an anchor. The seller might realize that the
customer would not be willing to pay $24.99 for the product if asked a direct
question; however, the seller may be hoping that the customer will use the $50
figure as an anchor and insufficiently adjust downward, and therefore end up
with a final WTP exceeding $24.99. That is, the seller hopes that people will
use the greater number as an anchor. Anchoring and adjustment might also
explain why realtors often publish an asking price that is higher than what
they expect to receive for the property: by publishing a higher number, they
might hope to influence what potential buyers would be willing to pay.

Exercise 3.55 Toasters Suppose that you wanted to sell toasters for $160,
which will strike customers like a lot. How does research on anchoring and
adjustment suggest that you do it?

You can also use anchoring and adjustment to increase the quantity that customers buy. Promotions of the form “3 for $2,” “Limit of 6 per person,” and “Buy
10 get 2 for free” work this way. To the extent that customers use the suggested
quantity as an anchor and adjust insufficiently downward when deciding what
quantity to purchase, such promotions can dramatically increase sales.

===== PAGE 87 =====

68 Partl

Choice under Certainty

Anchoring and adjustment might also play a role in other kinds of decision. A German study of experienced judges and prosecutors found that sentencing decisions reflected irrelevant information provided to them by the
researchers. Before handing down their decisions in a realistic but fictional
case of sexual assault, the legal professionals were asked to imagine that a
journalist called to ask if the sentence would be higher or lower than x years.
The call should have no influence on the decision, but the researchers found
that it did: when x was 1, the recommended sentence was 25 months; when
x was 3, the recommended sentence was 33 months. Most amazingly, the difference between conditions remained significant even when the participants
in the study were told that the anchor was generated randomly — and when it
was generated randomly right before their eyes by the rolling of dice.

It is important not to exaggerate people’s susceptibility to anchoring-andadjustment-related bias. It may be that people respond to suggested retail
prices (and the like) because they take a high suggested retail price to signal
high quality. If so, their behavior may not be due to anchoring and adjustment
at all. They would not even be making a choice under certainty. That said,
this line of argument cannot explain how roulette wheels and social security
numbers can affect behavior, on the assumption that no one would take such
numbers as a mark of quality.

Either way, the heuristics-and-biases program has been enormously influential, and we will continue to discuss it below (for example in Sections 5.2 and
5.6). Because it carries so much explanatory power, we will return to anchoring and adjustment repeatedly (see, for example, Exercise 4.30 on page 85).

3.7 Discussion

This chapter has reviewed a number of different phenomena that appear to
pose a problem for the theory that we learned in Chapter 2. Most of these
phenomena are presented as challenges to the descriptive adequacy of
rational-choice theory. Thus, behavioral economists think of the manner in
which people ignore opportunity costs but honor sunk costs, exhibit menu
dependence, overweight losses relative to gains, and permit arbitrary anchors
to unduly affect their behavior as inconsistent with the view that people actually behave in accordance with rational-choice theory. Though far from universal, the deviations appear to be substantial, systematic, and predictable.
Examples have illustrated that these phenomena can be costly indeed, not just
in terms of time, effort, and money, but also in terms of human lives. Some of
the phenomena that we have studied can also be construed as challenges to
the normative adequacy of the theory. When it comes to opportunity costs,
for example, we noted how extraordinarily demanding the theory can be. It
has been argued that this makes the theory unsuitable as a normative theory.
Obviously, this chapter does not pretend to have presented a complete list of
phenomena that are at odds with standard theory of choice under certainty.
We have also reviewed some basic building blocks of theories that behavioral economists have proposed to account for phenomena that cannot be

===== PAGE 88 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 69

captured within standard economics. Thus, we have studied the value function of prospect theory, which is one of the most prominent theories to emerge
from behavioral economics. We have also come across the notion of a heutistic, which is essential to the enormously influential heuristics-and-biases
program. We will return to prospect theory and the heuristics-and-biases program repeatedly below. Studying these theories will give you a better idea of
what behavioral economists do, beyond finding fault with standard theory.

In the process, we have come across a variety of ways in which knowledge
of behavioral economics permits you to influence the behavior of others. By
appealing to sunk costs, introducing asymmetrically dominated alternatives,
altering the frame in which options are presented, or introducing arbitrary
anchors, you can affect other people’s evaluation of various options. Since
standard economic models frequently treat the options available to consumers as ordered n-tuples of price and product characteristics, it leaves out many
variables of interest to marketers, medical doctors, public health officials, and
the like. By bringing things such as framing and reference points into the picture, behavioral economics offers a wider range of levers that can be used to
influence people’s behavior (for good or for evil). But knowledge of behavioral economics can also help you resist other people’s efforts to manipulate
your behavior. By being aware of the manner in which sunk costs, inferior
alternatives, framing, and heuristics affect your behavior, you may be less
likely to fall for other people’s tricks.

We will return to these themes in later chapters, after we have studied the
standard theory of judgment under risk and uncertainty.

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 3.56 AEA The following question was famously asked of 200
professional economists at the 2005 meeting of the American Economic
Association (AEA). By looking up the answer in the answer key, you can
compare your performance with theirs:

You won a free ticket to see an Eric Clapton concert (which has no resale
value). Bob Dylan is performing on the same night and is your next-best alternative activity. Tickets to see Dylan cost $40. On any given day, you would
be willing to pay up to $50 to see Dylan. Assume there are no other costs of
seeing either performer. Based on this information, what is the opportunity
cost of seeing Eric Clapton? (a) $0, (b) $10, (c) $40, or (d) $50.

Exercise 3.57 Does money buy happiness? Research by economists
Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers finds that the marginal happiness of
money is positive (though sharply diminishing) at all levels of income.
This means that all things equal, more money would make the average person happier (though less and less so when she becomes richer).
Writing in The Atlantic, Derek Thompson concludes: “Money Buys
Happiness and You Can Never Have Too Much.” But it would be a mistake to infer that the average person would be happier if she made more
money. What is overlooked here?

===== PAGE 89 =====

70 Part1 Choice under Certainty

|| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

Exercise 3.58 Hot yoga “You're back; you must have liked it!,” says
the hot-yoga studio receptionist the second time you use your one-week
pass. What fallacy might the receptionist be unfamiliar with?

Exercise 3.59 Mr Humphryes The following quotation is from a 2009
news story titled “Tension builds around courthouses’ reopening.” The
controversy concerns whether to reopen a satellite courthouse in a building that the county owns or one in a building that the county leases.
What fallacy does Mr Humphryes commit?

The county owns the Centerpoint Building and leases Gardendale and
Forestdale buildings. [Commissioner Bobby] Humphryes believes it would
make economic sense to open one of the buildings [the] county leases. “I
think it’s senseless to shut down a building we have leases on when we let
the others remain idle, we don’t have leases on and don’t owe money on,”
Humphryes said.

Exercise 3.60 Pear Corporation The Pear computer company is introducing a new line of tablet computers. The Macro has huge storage
capacity but is not very affordable. The Micro has limited storage capacity but is very affordable.
(a) Market research suggests that a typical consumer tends to be indifferent between the Micro and the Macro. Draw a graph with storage
capacity on the x-axis and affordability on the y-axis. Use a solid line
to represent a typical consumer's indifference curves going through
the Micro and the Macro.
Pear wants to steer customers toward the more expensive tablet
computer. They decide to use a decoy, which they will call the Dud,
to accomplish this goal. Use an “X” to mark the location of the Dud
in the graph.
(c) Use dashed lines to show what the typical consumer’s indifference curves would look like if the introduction of the Dud had the
intended effect.

(b

=

Exercise 3.61 Tim and Bill Tim and Bill are addicted to Apple products.
They are looking at the new iPhone at a store that offers a no-questions-asked
return policy. They are not sure the new features are worth it. Tim decides to
take one home, thinking that he can always return it tomorrow. Bill decides
against taking one home, thinking that he can always come back and pick
one up tomorrow. They are both loss averse, with a value function over
iPhones of (x) = x for gains and v(x) = 3x for losses. Ignore transaction costs.

(a) After Tim has taken his phone home, he incorporates it into his
endowment. How much of a loss, in value terms, would he incur by
returning it tomorrow?

(b) Bill, who does not take his phone home, does not incorporate it into
his endowment. How much of a foregone gain, in value terms, does
the phone he does not own represent to him?

(c) Who is more likely to end up the owner of an iPhone, Tim or Bill?

===== PAGE 90 =====

Chapter 3. Decision-Making under Certainty 71

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

Exercise 3.62 Larry and Janet Larry and Janet are loss averse: their

value function is o(x) = x/3 for gains and v(x) = 3x for losses. The two

hold stock in the same company. They bought it yesterday, when the stock

was worth $7. Today, unfortunately, it dropped to $4.

(a) Larry uses the original price ($7) as his reference point. If you ask
him, how much value did he lose when the price dropped to $4?

(b) Janet uses the new price ($4) as her reference point. If you ask her,
how much value did she lose when the price dropped to $4?

(c) Who is more disappointed, Larry or Janet?

Exercise 3.63 W.E.B. Du Bois The great African-American scholar and
activist W. E. B. Du Bois said: “The most important thing to remember is
this: To be ready at any moment to give up what you are for what you might
become.” Why is this so hard, and why do people have to be reminded?

Exercise 3.64 Seneca What phenomenon might Seneca have had in
mind when he wrote the following? “Let us turn now to inheritances, the
greatest cause of human distress; for should you compare all the other
ills that make us suffer...with the evils that our money causes us, this
portion will easily preponderate.”

Exercise 3.65 Match each of the vignettes below with one of the following phenomena: anchoring and adjustment, compromise effect, failure to
consider opportunity costs, loss aversion, and sunk-cost fallacy. If in doubt,
pick the best fit.
(a) Adam has just arrived at the movie theater when he realizes that he
has lost the $10 ticket he bought just before dinner. The theater staff
informs him that there are more tickets available. “I’m not buying
another ticket,” he tells them. “This movie may be worth ten bucks
but there’s no way I’m going to pay 20 for it.” He is angry with himself all night.

Bruce is buying a new car, which he intends to keep for a long time.

The car dealership has two new cars for sale. There is no difference

except for the color: one is red and one is metallic blue. The red one

used to be $15,995 and the metallic blue one $16,495; both are on sale
for $14,995. Bruce has no particular preference for blue, and fears
that the metallic finish will make him look unmanly. Still, thinking
about what these cars used to cost, it seems to him that it would

be worth paying more for the blue one, which makes it seem like a

better deal. He tells the car salesman that he will take the blue one,

though he secretly wonders how his friends will react.

(c) The owners of the local organic grocery store decide that they want to
encourage their customers to use fewer plastic bags. They decide that
the customers would be upset if the store started charging money for
the bags — after all, people expect their plastic bags to be free. Instead,
they gradually raise the prices of their goods by an average of 25 cents

(b

a

===== PAGE 91 =====

72 Partl

Choice under Certainty

|| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

per customer, and give people who bring their own bags a 25-cent

discount. Current customers have no problem with this arrangement.

A philosophy department is hiring a new professor. There are two

candidates. Dr A does aesthetics. Dr E does ethics. Everybody agrees

that Dr E is the most accomplished philosopher. However, Prof. P

maintains that Dr Ashould be hired anyway, because the Department

used to have a spectacularly talented professor in aesthetics.

Erica is a highly paid neurosurgeon with no shortage of work. Every

second Friday afternoon she leaves work early to go home and mow

the lawn. She takes no pleasure in mowing the lawn, but she cannot
bring herself to pay the lawn guy $75 to do it for her.

(f) Frank is looking at strollers for his first child. He is undecided
between the basic SE model and the slightly more upscale CE model.
Suddenly, he realizes that there exists a third option, the extra-special
XS model. He settles on the CE model.

(d

=

(e

=

Problem 3.66 Drawing on your own experience, make up stories like
those in Exercise 3.65 to illustrate the various ideas that you have read about
in this chapter.

FURTHER READING

The jacket/calculator problem appears in Tversky and Kahneman (1981, p. 457). The
idea that choices can lead to unhappiness is explored in Schwartz (2004, pp. 122-3).
The classic analysis of sunk costs is Arkes and Blumer (1985), but see also Hastie and
Dawes (2010, pp. 34-42). Reading habits are discussed in Goodreads.com (2013)

and the F-35 in Francis (2014). The line from Aristotle is from the Nicomachean Ethics
(1999 [¢ 350 BCE], p. 87); escalation behavior is analyzed in Staw and Ross (1989), the
source of the George Ball quotation (p. 216); and the California railroad is discussed in
Nagourney (2011). Decoy effects are discussed in Huber et al. (1982) and Ariely (2008);
the latter is the source of the example involving subscription offers (pp. 1-6). The classic
text on reason-based choice is Shafir et al. (1993). A great review of loss aversion, the
endowment effect, and status quo bias is Kahneman et al. (1991); the fate of the speeding Irishman was reported by the Associated Press (2007); the Adam Smith quotation

is from Smith (2002 [1759], p. 151); the fate of the Florida waitress was chronicled by
the St Petersburg Times (2001); and Barry Bonds was quoted in Myers (1992, p. 57).
The passages from Seneca appear in Seneca (2007 [c 49], pp. 124-125); the internet
entrepreneur is cited in Hafner (2006). Byron York (2013) discusses taking money away
from people; Friedman and Friedman (1984) criticize “temporary” government programs.
The classic discussion of anchoring and adjustment is Tversky and Kahneman (1974),
which is also the source of the examples and data cited early in the section; the followup experiments are described in Ariely et al. (2003). The German study of judges and
prosecutors is Englich et al. (2006). The study of professional economists is discussed in
Frank (2005) and the marginal happiness of money in Thompson (2013). Mr Humphryes
is cited by FOX6 WBRC (2009) and Du Bois in Hampton (2012 p. 185).

===== PAGE 92 =====

PART

Judgment
under Risk and
Uncertainty

4 Probability Judgment

4.1 Introduction

4.2 Fundamentals of probability theory
4.3 Unconditional probability

4.4 Conditional probability

4.5 Total probability and Bayes’s rule
4.6 Bayesian updating

4.7 Discussion

5 Judgment under Risk and
Uncertainty

5.1 Introduction

5.2 The gambler’s fallacy

5.3 Conjunction and disjunction fallacies

5.4 Base-rate neglect

5.5 Confirmation bias

5.6 Availability

5.7 Overconfidence

5.8 Discussion

===== PAGE 93 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 94 =====

CHAPTER

Probability Judgment =

4.1 Introduction

Though the theory of choice explored in Part 1 is helpful for a range of purposes, most real-life decisions are not choices under certainty. When you
decide whether to start a company, buy stocks, propose to the love of your
life, or have a medical procedure, you will not typically know at the time of
making the decision what the outcome of each available act would be. In order
to capture what people do, and what they should do, in such situations, we
need another theory. Part 2 explores theories of judgment: how people form
and change beliefs. In Part 3, we will return to the topic of decision-making.

In this chapter, we explore the theory of probability. There is wide — but far
from complete — agreement that this is the correct normative theory of probabilistic judgment, that is, that it correctly captures how we should make probabilistic judgments. Consequently, the theory of probability is widely used in
statistics, engineering, finance, public health, and elsewhere. Moreover, the
theory can be used as a descriptive theory about how people make judgments,
and it can be used as part of a theory about how they make decisions.

Like the theory of rational choice under certainty, probability theory is axiomatic. Thus, we begin by learning a set of axioms — which will be called
“rules” — and which you will have to take for granted. Most of the time, this
is not hard: once you understand them, the rules may strike you as intuitively
plausible. We will also adopt a series of definitions. Having done that, though,
everything else can be derived. Thus, we will spend a great deal of time below
proving increasingly interesting and powerful principles on the basis of axioms and definitions.

4.2 Fundamentals of probability theory

Here are two classic examples of probability judgment.

Example 4.1 Mrs Jones’s children You are visiting your new neighbor, Mrs
Jones. Mrs Jones tells you that she has two children, who are playing in their
room. Assume that each time somebody has a child, the probability of having
a girl is the same as the probability of having a boy (and that whether the
mother had a boy or a girl the first time around does not affect the probabilities involved the second time around). Now, Mrs Jones tells you that at least
one of the children is a girl. What is the probability that the other child is a
girl too?

===== PAGE 95 =====

76 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

Example 4.2 The Linda problem Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken and
very bright. She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice and also participated in
anti-nuclear demonstrations.

(a) What is the probability that Linda is a bank teller?

(b) What is the probability that Linda is a bank teller and a feminist?

Answers to these questions will be given once we have developed the apparatus required to address them rigorously. For now, I will just note that one
reason why this theory is interesting is that people’s intuitive probability
judgments — and therefore many of their decisions — tend to fail in predictable ways.

Before we start, we need to develop a conceptual apparatus that will permit us to speak more clearly about the subject matter. For example, we want
to talk about the different things that can conceivably happen. When you flip
a coin, for instance, you can get heads or you can get tails; when you roll a sixsided die, you can get any number between one and six.

Definition 4.3 Definition of “outcome space” The outcome space is the
set of all possible individual outcomes.

We represent outcome spaces following standard conventions, using curly
brackets and commas. To denote the outcome space associated with flipping
a coin, we write: {Heads, Tails} or {H, T}. To denote the outcome space associated with rolling a six-sided die, we write: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.

Oftentimes, we want to talk about what actually happened or about what
may happen. If so, we are talking about actual outcomes, as in “the coin came
up tails” and “I might roll snake eyes (two ones).”

Definition 4.4 Definition of “outcome” An outcome is a subset of the outcome space.

We write outcomes following the same conventions. Thus, some of the outcomes associated with one roll of a six-sided die include: {1} for one, {6} for
six, {1, 2, 3} for a number less than or equal to three, and {2, 4, 6} for an even
number. There is one exception: when the outcome only has one member, we
may omit the curly brackets and write 6 instead of {6}. Notice that in all these
cases, the outcomes are subsets of the outcome space.

Definition 4.5 Definition of “probability” The probability function is a
function Pr(.) that assigns a real number to each outcome. The probability of an
outcome A is the number Pr(A) assigned to A by the probability function Pr(-).

Hence, the probability of rolling an even number when rolling a six-sided die
is denoted Pr({2, 4, 6}). The probability of rolling a six is denoted Pr({6}), or
relying on the convention introduced above, Pr(6). The probability of getting
heads when flipping a coin is denoted Pr({H}) or Pr(H). The probability of
an outcome, of course, represents (in some sense) the chance of that outcome
happening. Sometimes people talk about odds instead of probabilities. Odds

===== PAGE 96 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment

and probabilities are obviously related, but they are not identical. Refer to the
text box on page 83 for more about odds.

The next propositions describe the properties of this probability function.
They will be referred to as the rules or axioms of probability.

Axiom 4.6 The range of probabilities — The probability of any outcome A isa
number between 0 and 1 inclusive; that is,0 = Pr(A) = 1.

Thus, probabilities have to be numbers no smaller than zero and no greater
than one. Equivalently, probabilities can be no lower than 0 percent and no
greater than 100 percent. You might not know the probability that your internet startup company will survive its first year. But you do know this: the probability is no lower than 0 percent and no greater than 100 percent.

In general, it can be difficult to compute probabilities. People such as engineers and public health officials spend a lot of time trying to determine the
probabilities of events such as nuclear disasters and global pandemics. There
is one case in which computing probabilities is easy, however, and that is in
the case when individual outcomes are equally probable, or equiprobable.

Axiom 4.7 The ecquiprosasiry rule If there are n equally probable individual
outcomes {A,, A,, ... ,A,}, then the probability of any one individual outcome A, is
1/n; that is, Pr(A) = 1/n.

Suppose we are asked to compute the probability of getting a four when rolling a fair die. Because all outcomes are equally likely (that is what it means for
the die to be fair) and because there are six outcomes, the probability of getting
a four is 1/6. So Pr(4) = 1/6. Similarly, the probability of getting heads when
flipping a fair coin is 1/2. So Pr(H) = 1/2.

Exercise 4.8 Suppose that you are drawing one card each from two thoroughly shuffled but otherwise normal decks of cards. What is the probability
that you draw the same card from the two decks?

You could answer this question by analyzing all 52? = 2704 different outcomes
associated with drawing two cards from two decks. The easiest way to think
about it, though, is to ask what it would take for the second card to match the
first.

Exercise 4.9 The Large Hadron Collider According to some critics, the Large
Hadron Collider has a 50 percent chance of destroying the world. In an interview with the Daily Show's John Oliver on April 30, 2009, science teacher
Walter Wagner argued: “If you have something that can happen, and something that won’t necessarily happen, it’s going to either happen or it’s going
to not happen, and so the best guess is one in two.” Why is this not a correct
application of the EQUIPROBABILITY rule?

As it happens, we have already developed enough of an apparatus to address
Example 4.1. First, we need to identify the outcome space associated with
having two children. Writing G for “girl” and B for “boy,” and BG for “the

77

===== PAGE 97 =====

78 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

oldest child is a boy and the youngest child is a girl,” the outcome space is
{GG, GB, BG, BB}. Once you learn that at least one of the children is a girl, you
know for a fact that it is not the case that both children are boys. That is, you
know that BB does not obtain. This means that the outcome space has been
reduced to {GG, GB, BG}. In only one of three cases (GG) is the other child a
girl also. Because these three outcomes are equally likely, you can apply the
EQUIPROBABILITY rule to find that the probability that the other child is a girl
equals Pr(GG) = 1/3.

Exercise 4.10 Mrs Jones’s children, cont. Instead of telling you that at least
one of the children is a girl, Mrs Jones tells you that her oldest child is a girl.
Now, what is the probability that the other child is also a girl?

Exercise 4.11 Mr Peters’s children Your other neighbor, Mr Peters, has three

children. Having just moved to the neighborhood, you do not know whether

the children are boys or girls. Let us assume that every time Mr Peters had

a child, he was equally likely to have a boy and a girl (and that there are no

other possibilities).

(a) What is the relevant outcome space?

(b) Imagine that you learn that at least one of the children is a girl. What is the
new outcome space?

(c) Given that you know that at least one of the children is a girl, what is the
probability that Mr Peters has three girls?

(d) Imagine that you learn that at least two of the children are girls. What is
the new outcome space?

(e) Given that you know that at least two of the children are girls, what is the
probability that Mr Peters has three girls?

Exercise 4.12 Three-card swindle Your friend Bill is showing you his new
deck of cards. The deck consists of only three cards. The first card is white on
both sides. The second card is red on both sides. The third card is white on one
side and red on the other. Now Bill shuffles the deck well, occasionally turning individual cards over in the process. Perhaps he puts them all in a hat and
shakes the hat for a long time. Then he puts the stacked deck on the table in
such a way that you can see the visible face of the top card only.
(a) What is the outcome space? Write “W/R” to denote the outcome where
the visible side of the top card is white and the other side is red, and so on.
(b) After shuffling, the visible side of the top card is white. What is the new
outcome space?
(c) Given that the visible side of the top card is white, what is the probability
that the other side of the top card is red?

This last exercise is called the “three-card swindle,” because it can be used. to
fool people into giving up their money. If you bet ten dollars that the other
side is white, you will find that many people are willing to accept the bet.
This is so because they (mistakenly) believe that the probability is 50 percent.
You might lose. Yet, because you have got the probabilities on your side, on
average you will make money. It is not clear that this game deserves the name

===== PAGE 98 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment

“swindle” since it involves no deception. Still, because this might be illegal
where you live, you did not hear it from me.

Exercise 4.13 Four-card swindle Your other friend Bull has another deck of

cards. This deck has four cards: one card is white on both sides; one card is

black on both sides; one card is red on both sides; and one card is white on one

side and red on the other. Imagine that you shuffle the deck well, including

turning individual cards upside down every so often.

(a) What is the outcome space? Write “W/R” to denote the outcome where
the visible side of the top card is white and the other side is red, and so on.

(b) Suppose that after shuffling, the visible side of the top card is black. What
is the new outcome space?

(c) Given that the visible side of the top card is black, what is the probability
that the other side of the card is black as well?

(d) Suppose that after shuffling, the visible side of the top card is red. What is
the new outcome space?

(e) Given that the visible side of the top card is red, what is the probability
that the other side of the card is white?

We end this section with one more exercise.

Exercise 4.14 The Monty Hall Problem You are on a game show. The host
gives you the choice of three doors, all of which are closed. Behind one door
there is a car; behind the others are goats. Here is what will happen. First, you
will point to a door. Next, the host, who knows what is behind each door and
who is doing his best to make sure you do not get the car, will open one of
the other two doors (which will have a goat). Finally, you can choose to open.
either one of the remaining two closed doors; that is, you can keep pointing to
the same door, or you can switch. If you do not switch, what is the probability
of finding the car?

4.3 Unconditional probability

The theory should also allow us to compute unknown probabilities on the
basis of known probabilities. In this section we study four rules that do this.

Axiom 4.15 The or rule If two outcomes A and B are mutually exclusive (see
below), then the probability of A or B equals the probability of A plus the probability
of B; that is, Pr(A V B) = Pr(A) + Pr(B).

Suppose that you want to know the probability of rolling a one or a two
when you roll a fair six-sided die. The or rule tells you that the answer is
Pr(1 Vv 2) = Pr(1) + Pr(2) = 1/6 + 1/6=1/3. Or suppose that you want to
know the probability of flipping heads or tails when flipping a fair coin. The
same rule tells you that Pr(H Vv T) = Pr(H) + Pr(T) =1/2+1/2=1.

Notice that the rule requires that the two outcomes be mutually exclusive. What does this mean? Two outcomes A and B are mutually exclusive

79

===== PAGE 99 =====

80 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

just in case at most one of them can happen. In the previous two examples,
this condition holds. When flipping a coin, H and T are mutually exclusive
since at most one of them can occur every time you flip a coin. No coin can
land heads and tails at the same time. Similarly, when you roll one die, one
and two are mutually exclusive, since at most one of them can occur. Notice
that the latter two outcomes are mutually exclusive even though neither one
may occur.

Exercise 4.16 Mutual exclusivity Which pairs of outcomes are mutually
exclusive? More than one answer may be correct.

(a) Itis your birthday; you have a test.

(b) It rains; night falls.

(c) You get Bs in all of your classes; you get a 4.0 GPA.

(d) Your new computer is a Mac; your new computer is a PC.

(e) You are a remarkable student; you get a good job after graduation.

Exercise 4.17 What is the probability of drawing an ace when drawing
one card from a regular (well-shuffled) deck of cards? If you intend to apply
the or rule, do not forget to check that the relevant outcomes are mutually
exclusive.

The importance of checking whether two outcomes are mutually exclusive
is best emphasized by giving an example. What is the probability of rolling
a fair die and getting a number that is either strictly less than six or strictly
greater than one? It is quite obvious that you could not fail to roll a number
strictly less than six or strictly greater than one, so the probability must be
100 percent. If you tried to take the probability that you roll a number strictly
less than six plus the probability that you roll a number strictly greater than
one, you would end up with a number greater than one, which would be a
violation of Axiom 4.6. So there is good reason for the or rule to require that
outcomes be mutually exclusive.

The answer to the question in the previous paragraph follows from the
following straightforward rule:

Axiom 4.18 The everyruine rule The probability of the entire outcome space
is equal to one.

So, Pr({1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}) = 1 by the EVERYTHING rule. We could also have computed this number by using the or rule, because Pr({1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}) = Pr(1 or
2 08 3 oR 4 OR 5 oR 6) = Pr(1) + Pr(2) + Pr(3) + Pr(4) + Pr(5) + Pr(6) = 1/6
* 6 = 1. The or rule (Axiom 4.15) applies because the six individual outcomes
are mutually exclusive; the EQUIPROBABILITY rule (Axiom 4.7) applies because
all outcomes are equally probable. What the EVERYTHING rule tells us that we
did not already know is that the probability of the entire outcome space equals
one whether or not the outcomes are equiprobable. The next rule is easy too.

Axiom 4.19 The nor rule The probability that some outcome A will not occur
is equal to one minus the probability that it does. That is, Pr(-A) = 1 — Pr(A).

===== PAGE 100 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment

For example, suppose that you want to know the probability of rolling anything
but a six when rolling a six-sided die. By the Nor rule, the probability that we
toll anything but a six can be computed as Pr(-6) = 1 — Pr(6) =1—1/6 =5/6.
Given that the outcomes are mutually exclusive, we could have computed this
using the or rule too. (How?) In general, it is good to check that you get the
same number when solving the same problem in different ways. If you do not,
there is something wrong with your calculations.

Axiom 4.20 The ano rule If two outcomes A and B are independent (see below),
then the probability of A AnD B equals the probability of A multiplied by the probability of B; that is, Pr(A & B) = Pr(A) * Pr(B).

Suppose you flip a fair coin twice. What is the probability of getting two
heads? Writing H, for heads on the first coin, and so on, by the aNp rule,
Pr(H,&H,) = Pr(H,) * Pr(H,) = 1/2 * 1/2 = 1/4. You could also solve this
problem by looking at the outcome space {H,H,, H,T,, T,H,, T,T,} and using
the EQUIPROBABILITY rule. Similarly, it is easy to compute the probability of
getting two sixes when rolling a fair die twice: Pr(6,&6,) = Pr(6,) * Pr(6,) =
1/6 *1/6 = 1/36.

Exercise 4.21 Are you more likely to get two sixes when rolling one fair die
twice or when simultaneously rolling two fair dice?

Notice that the anp rule requires that the two outcomes be independent.
What does this mean? Two outcomes A and B are independent just in case
the fact that one occurs does not affect the probability that the other one does.
This condition is satisfied when talking about a coin flipped twice. H, and H,
are independent since the coin has no memory: whether or not the coin lands
heads or tails the first time you flip it will not affect the probability of getting
heads (or tails) the second time.

Exercise 4.22 Independence What pairs of outcomes are independent?

More than one answer may be correct.

(a) You sleep late; you are late for class.

(b) You are a remarkable student; you get a good job after graduation.

(c) You write proper thank-you notes; you get invited back.

(d) The first time you flip a silver dollar you get heads; the second time you
flip a silver dollar you get tails.

(e) General Electric stock goes up; General Motors stock goes up.

Exercise 4.23 Luck in love According to a well-known saying: “Lucky in
cards, unlucky in love.” Is this to say that luck in cards and luck in love are
independent or not independent?

The importance of checking whether two outcomes are independent is best
emphasized by giving an example. What is the probability of simultaneously
getting a two and a three when you roll a fair die once? The answer is not
1/6 * 1/6 = 1/36, of course, but zero. The outcomes are not independent, so
you cannot use the AND rule. This example also tells you is that when two

81

===== PAGE 101 =====

82 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

outcomes are mutually exclusive they are not independent. (We will return to
the topic of independence in Section 5.2.)

Exercise 4.24 When rolling two fair dice, what is the probability that the
number of dots add up to 11? If you intend to use the or rule, make sure the
relevant outcomes are mutually exclusive. If you intend to use the AND rule,
make sure the relevant outcomes are independent.

Exercise 4.25 Suppose you draw two cards from a well-shuffled deck of

cards with replacement, meaning that you put the first card back into the deck

(and shuffle the deck once more) before drawing the second card.

(a) What is the probability that you draw the ace of spades twice?

(b) What is the probability that you draw two aces? (Here, you can use your
answer to Exercise 4.17.)

We are now in a position to address Example 4.2. Obviously, the theory of
probability by itself will not tell you the probability that Linda is a bank teller.
But it can tell you something else. Let F mean that Linda is a feminist and B
that Linda is a bank teller. Then the probability that she is both a feminist and
a bank teller is Pr(B&F) = Pr(B) * Pr(F). (In order to apply the ann rule here, I
am assuming that the outcomes are independent; the general result, however,
holds even if they are not.) Because Pr(F) = 1 by Axiom 4.6, we know that
Pr(B) * Pr(F) = Pr(B). For, if you multiply a positive number x with a fraction
(between zero and one) you will end up with something less than x. So whatever the relevant probabilities involved are, it must be the case that Pr(B&F) =
Pr(B); that is, the probability that Linda is a bank teller and a feminist has to be
smaller than or equal to the probability that she is a bank teller. Many people
will tell you that Linda is more likely to be a bank teller and a feminist than
she is to be a bank teller. This mistake is referred to as the conjunction fallacy,
about which you will hear more in Section 5.3.

We end this section with one more exercise.

Exercise 4.26 For the following questions, assume that you are rolling two
fair dice:

(a) What is the probability of getting two sixes?

(b) What is the probability of getting no sixes?

(c) What is the probability of getting exactly one six?

(d) What is the probability of getting at least one six?

To compute the answer to (c), note that there are two ways to roll exactly one
six. When answering (d), note that there are at least two ways to compute the
answer. You can recognize that rolling at least one six is the same as rolling two
sixes or rolling exactly one six and add up the answers to (a) and (c). Or you can
recognize that rolling at least one six is the same as not rolling no sixes and compute the answer using the NoT rule.

Exercise 4.27 In computing the answer to Exercise 4.26(d), you may have
been tempted to add the probability of rolling a six on the one die (1/6) to the

===== PAGE 102 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment

123 4 5 6

25/36 5/36

5/36

Figure 4.1 | The two dice

joanna

probability of rolling a six on the other die (1/6) to get the answer 2/6 = 1/3.
That, however, would be a mistake. Why?

Odds

Sometimes probabilities are expressed in terms of odds rather than probabilities. Imagine that you have an urn containing 2 black and 3 white
balls, so that the probability of drawing a black ball is 2/5. One way to
get this figure is to divide the number of favorable outcomes (outcomes
in which the event of interest obtains) by the total number of outcomes.
By contrast, you get the odds of drawing a black ball by dividing the
number of favorable outcomes by the number of unfavorable outcomes,
so that the odds of drawing a black ball are 2 to 3 or 2:3. Under the same
assumptions, the odds of drawing a white ball are 3:2. If there is an equal
number of black and white balls in the urn, the odds are 1 to 1 or 1:1.
Such odds are also said to be even. When people talk about a 50-50
chance, they are obviously talking about even odds, since 50/50 = 1.
How do odds relate to probabilities? If you have the probability p and
want the odds 0, you apply the following formula:

P

o= 1-p
When p equals 2/5, it is easy to confirm that o equals 2/5 divided by 3/5
which is 2/3 or 2:3. If the probability is 1/2, the odds are 1/2 divided by
1/2 which is 1 or 1:1. If you have the odds ¢ and want the probability p,
you apply the inverse formula:

oO

pe o+1

When o equals 2:3, you can quickly confirm that p equals 2/3 divided
by 5/3 which is 2/5. If the odds are even, the probability is 1 divided
by 1+1, which is 1/2. The use of odds instead of probabilities can come
across as old-fashioned. But there are areas — for example, some games
of chance and some areas of statistics — where odds are consistently used.
It is good to know how to interpret them.

===== PAGE 103 =====

84 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

If the answers to Exercise 4.26 are not completely obvious already, refer to
Figure 4.1. Here, the numbers to the left represent what might happen when
you roll the first die and the numbers on top represent what might happen
when you roll the second die. Thus, the table has 6 * 6 = 36 cells representing
all the possible outcomes of rolling two dice. The dark gray area represents the
possibility that both dice are sixes; because there is only one way to roll two
sixes, this area contains but one cell and the answer to (a) is 1/36. The white
area represents the possibility that both dice are non-sixes; because there are 5
« 5 ways to roll two non-sixes, this area contains 25 cells and the answer to (b)
is 25/36. The light gray areas represent the possibility that one die is a six and
the other one is a non-six; because there are 5 + 5 ways to attain this outcome,
these areas contain ten cells and the answer to (c) is 10/36. You can compute
the answer to (d) by counting the 5 + 5 + 1 = 11 cells in the two light gray
and the one dark gray areas and get an answer of 11/36. But a smarter way is
to realize that the gray areas cover everything that is not white, which allows
you to get the answer by computing 1 — 25/36 = 11/36. Why this is smarter
will be clear in Section 5.3. The figure also illustrates why you cannot compute
the probability of getting at least one six by adding the probability of rolling a
six on the first die to the probability of rolling a six on the second one. If you
were to do that, you would add the number of cells in the bottom row to the
number of cells in the right-most column — thereby double-counting the cell
on the bottom-right.

4.4 Conditional probability

In Exercise 4.25, you computed the probability of drawing two aces when
drawing two cards with replacement. Suppose, instead, that you draw two
aces without replacement, meaning that you put the first card aside after looking
at it. What is the probability of drawing two aces without replacement? You
know you cannot use Axiom 4.20, since the two outcomes we are interested
in (drawing an ace the first time and drawing an ace the second time) are not
independent. You can, however, approach the problem in the following way.
First, you can ask what the probability is that the first card is an ace. Because
there are 52 cards in the deck, and 4 of those are aces, you know that this probability is 4/52. Second, you can ask what the probability is that the second
card is an ace, given that the first card was an ace. Because there are 51 cards left
in the deck, and only 3 of them are aces, this probability is 3/51. Now you can
multiply these numbers and get:

4 3 12 1

52" 51 2652 221°
This procedure can be used to calculate the probability of winning certain
types of lotteries. According to the Consumer Federation of America, about
one in five Americans believe that “the most practical way for them to accumulate several hundred thousand dollars is to win the lottery.” The poor, least
educated, and oldest are particularly likely to think of the lottery as a smart

===== PAGE 104 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment

way to get rich. So it might be useful to ask just how likely or unlikely it is to
win common lotteries.

Exercise 4.28 Lotto 6/49 Many states and countries operate lotteries in
which the customer picks 1 of m numbers, in any order, where n is considerably smaller than m. In one version of this lottery, which I will call Lotto 6/49,
players circle 6 numbers out of 49 using a ticket like that in Figure 4.2. The
order in which numbers are circled does not matter. You win the grand prize
if all 6 are correct. What is the probability that you win the Lotto 6/49 any one
time you play? Notice that this is similar to picking six consecutive aces out of
a deck with 49 cards, if 6 of those cards are aces.

The fact that the probability of winning the lottery is low does not imply that
it is necessarily irrational to buy these tickets. (We will return to this topic in
Part 3.) Nevertheless, it may be fun to ask some questions about these lotteries.

Problem 4.29 Lotto 6/49, cont. What does the probability of winning the
Lotto 6/49 tell you about the wisdom of buying Lotto tickets? What does it tell you
about people who buy these tickets?

Exercise 4.30 Lotto 6/49, cont. Use the idea of anchoring and adjustment
from Section 3.6 to explain why people believe that they have a good chance
of winning these lotteries.

Considerations like these clarify why state lottery schemes are sometimes
described as a tax on innumeracy.

The probability that something happens given that some other thing happens is called a conditional probability. We write the probability that A given
C, or the probability of A conditional on C, as follows: Pr(A|C). Conditional
probabilities are useful for a variety of purposes. It may be easier to compute
conditional probabilities than unconditional probabilities. Knowing the conditional probabilities is oftentimes quite enough to solve the problem at hand.

Notice right away that Pr(A|C) is not the same thing as Pr(C|A). Though
these two probabilities may be identical, they need not be. Suppose, for example, that S means that Joe is a smoker, while H means that Joe is human. If so,

LOTTO 6/49

123 4 5 6 7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14
15 16 17 18 19 20 21
22 23 24 25 26 27 28
29 30 31 32 33 34 36
36 37 38 39 40 41 42
43 44 45 46 47 48 49

| Figure 4.2 | Lotto 6/49 ticket

85

===== PAGE 105 =====

86 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

Pr(S|H) is the probability that Joe is a smoker given that Joe is human, which
is a number somewhere between zero and one. Meanwhile, Pr(H|S) is the
probability that Joe is human given that Joe is a smoker, which is one (or at
least close to one). Joe may not be a human being for quite as long if he is a
smoker, but that is another matter.

Exercise 4.31 Conditional Probabilities Suppose that H means “The patient

has a headache” and T means “The patient has a brain tumor.”

(a) How do you interpret the two conditional probabilities Pr(H|T) and
Pr(T|H)?

(b) Are the two numbers more or less the same?

It should be clear that the two conditional probabilities in general are different, and that it is important for both doctors and patients to keep them apart.
(We will return to this topic in sections 5.4 and 5.6.)

Suppose that you draw one card from a well-shuffled deck, and that you
are interested in the probability of drawing the ace of spades given that you
draw an ace. Given that you just drew an ace, there are four possibilities: the
ace of spades, ace of clubs, ace of hearts, or ace of diamonds. Because only
one of the four is the ace of spades, and because all four outcomes are equally
likely, this probability is 1/4. You can get the same answer by dividing the
probability that you draw the ace of spades by the probability that you draw
an ace: 1/52 divided by 4/52, which is 1/4. This is no coincidence, as the formal definition of conditional probability will show.

Definition 4.32 Conditional probability If A and B are two outcomes,
Pr(A|B) = Pr(A &B)/ Pr(B).

As another example of conditional probability, recall the problem with the two
aces. Let A denote “the second card is an ace” and let B denote “the first card
is an ace.” We know that the probability of drawing two aces without replacement is 1/221. This is Pr(A& B). We also know that the probability that the first
card is an ace is 1/13. This is Pr(B). So by definition:

Pr(A&B) 1/221. 3
Pr(B) i351

Pr(A|B)

But we knew this: 3/51 is the probability that the second card is an ace given
that the first card was: Pr(A & B). So the formula works.

Exercise 4.33 Ace of spades Use Definition 4.32 to compute the probability
that you draw an ace of spades conditional on having drawn an ace when you
draw one card from a well-shuffled deck. You can imagine a game show host
who draws a card at random and announces that the card is an ace, and a contestant who has to guess what kind of ace it is. Given. what you know about
that card, what is the probability that it is the ace of spades?

Because you cannot divide numbers by zero, things get tricky when some
probabilities are zero; here, I will ignore these complications.
One implication of the definition is particularly useful:

===== PAGE 106 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment

Proposition 4.34 The general ann rule Pr(A & B) = Pr(A|B) * Pr(B).

Proof. Starting off with Definition 4.32, multiply each side of the
equation by Pr(B).

According to this proposition, the probability of drawing two aces equals the
probability of drawing an ace the first time multiplied by the probability of
drawing an ace the second time given that you drew an ace the first time. But
again, we knew this. In fact, we implicitly relied on this rule when computing
the answers to the first exercises in this section. Notice that this rule allows us
to compute the probability of A aNp B without requiring that the outcomes be
independent. This is why it is called the general anp rule.

Exercise 4.35 The general anp rule Use the general ann rule to compute
the probability that you will draw the ace of spades twice when drawing two
cards from a deck without replacement.

The general AND rule permits us to establish the following result.

Proposition 4.36 Pr(A|B) * Pr(B) = Pr(B|A) * Pr(A).

Proof. By Proposition 4.34, Pr(A&B) = Pr(A|B) * Pr(B) but also
Pr(B&A) = Pr(B| A) * Pr(A). Because by logic Pr(A&B) = Pr(B&A), it
must be the case that Pr(A|B) * Pr(B) = Pr(B| A) * Pr(A).

Suppose that you draw one card from a well-shuffled deck, and that A means
that you draw an ace and that ¢ means that you draw a diamond. If so, it follows that Pr(A| #) * Pr(#) = Pr(¢#|A) * Pr(A). You can check that this is true
by plugging in the numbers: 1/13 * 13/52 = 1/4 * 4/52=1/4.

This notion of conditional probability allows us to sharpen our definition
of independence. We said that two outcomes A and B are independent if the
probability of A does not depend on whether B occurred. Another way of saying this is to say that Pr(A|B) = Pr(A). In fact, there are several ways of saying
the same thing.

Proposition 4.37 Independence conditions The following three claims are
equivalent:
(i) Pr(A|B) = Pr(A)
(ii) Pr(B|A) = Pr(B)
(iii) Pr(A&B) = Pr(A) * Pr(B)

Proof. See Exercise 4.38.

Exercise 4.38 Independence conditions Prove that the three parts of
Proposition 4.37 are equivalent. The most convenient way of doing so is to
prove (a) that (i) implies (ii), (b) that (ii) implies (iii), and (c) that (iii) implies (i).

87

===== PAGE 107 =====

88 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

Notice that part (iii) is familiar: it is the principle that we know as the aND
rule (Axiom 4.20). Thus, the original anp rule follows logically from the
general AND rule and the assumption that the two outcomes in question are
independent. This is pretty neat.

4.5 Total probability and Bayes’s rule

Conditional probabilities can also be used to compute unconditional probabilities. Suppose that you are running a frisbee factory and that you want
to know the probability that one of your frisbees is defective. You have two
machines producing frisbees: a new one (B) producing 800 frisbees per day
and an old one (-B) producing 200 frisbees per day. Thus, the probability
that a randomly selected frisbee from your factory was produced by machine
B is Pr(B) = 800/(800 + 200) = 0.8; the probability that it was produced
by machine -B is Pr(=B) = 1 — Pr(B) = 0.2. Among the frisbees produced by
the new machine, one percent are defective (D); among those produced by
the old one, two percent are. The probability that a randomly selected frisbee
produced by machine B is defective is Pr(D|B) = 0.01; the probability that a
randomly selected frisbee produced by machine —B is defective is Pr(D| +B)
= 0.02. It may be useful to draw a tree illustrating the four possibilities (see
Figure 4.3).

What is the probability that a randomly selected frisbee from your factory is defective? There are two ways in which a defective frisbee can be produced: by machine B and by machine -B. So the probability that a frisbee is
defective Pr(D) equals the following probability: that the frisbee is produced
by machine B and turns out to be defective or that the frisbee is produced
by machine —B and turns out to be defective; that is, Pr([D&B] v [D&-B)).
These outcomes are obviously mutually exclusive, so the probability equals
Pr(D&B) + Pr(D&-B). Applying the general anv rule twice, this equals
Pr(D|B) * Pr(B) + Pr(D|-B) * Pr(-B). But we have all these numbers, so:

Pr(D) = Pr(DJB) * Pr(B)+ Pr(D|=B) * Pr(=B) = 0.01 * 0.8 + 0.02* 0.2 = 0.012.

Pr(D|B)

Pr(-DIB) ~~?

Pr(D|-B)

PraDHB) 7?

| Figure 4.3 | The frisbee factory

===== PAGE 108 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment 89

The probability that a randomly selected frisbee produced by your factory is defective is 1.2 percent. These calculations illustrate the rule of total
probability.

Proposition 4.39 The rule of total probability
Pr(D) = Pr(D|B) * Pr(B) + Pr(D|=B) * Pr(-B).

Proof. By logic, D is the same as [D&B] v [D&-—B]. So Pr(D) =
Pr([D &B] v [D &B)). Because the two outcomes are mutually exclusive, this equals Pr(D & B) + Pr(D &-B) by the or rule (Axiom 4.15).
Applying the general anp rule (Proposition 4.34) twice, we get Pr(D)
= Pr(D|B) * Pr(B) + Pr(D|-B) * Pr(-B).

Exercise 4.40 Cancer Use the rule of total probability to solve the following
problem. You are a physician meeting with a patient who has just been diagnosed with cancer. You know there are two mutually exclusive types of cancer
that the patient could have: type A and type B. The probability that he or she
has A is 1/3 and the probability that he or she has B is 2/3. Type A is deadly:
four patients out of five diagnosed with type A cancer die (D) within one year.
Type B is less dangerous: only one patient out of five diagnosed with type B
cancer dies (D) within one year.

(a) Draw a tree representing the four possible outcomes.

(b) Compute the probability that your patient dies within a year.

Exercise 4.41 Scuba diving certification You are scheduled to sit the test
required to be a certified scuba diver and very much hope you will pass (P).
The test can be easy (E) or not. The probability that it is easy is 60 percent. If it
is easy, you estimate that the probability of passing is 90 percent; if it is hard,
you estimate that the probability is 50 percent. What is the probability that
you pass (P)?

There is another type of question that you may ask as well. Suppose you pick
up one of the frisbees produced in your factory and find that it is defective.
What is the probability that the defective frisbee was produced by the new
machine? Here you are asking for the probability that a frisbee was B conditional on D, that is, Pr(B|D).

We know that there are two ways in which a defective frisbee can be
produced. Either it comes from the new machine, which is to say that
D&B, or it comes from the old machine, which is to say that D&-B. We
also know the probabilities that these states will obtain for any given frisbee (not necessarily defective): Pr(D&B) = Pr(D|B) * Pr(B) = 0.01 # 0.8 =
0.008 and Pr(D&-B) = Pr(D|-=B) * Pr(-B) = 0.02 + 0.2 = 0.004. We want
the probability that a frisbee comes from the new machine given that it is
defective, that is, Pr(B|D). By looking at the figures, you can tell that the
first probability is twice as large as the second one. What this means is that
in two cases out of three, a defective frisbee comes from the new machine.

===== PAGE 109 =====

90 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

Formally, Pr (D|B) = 0.008/0.012 = 2/3. This may be surprising, in light of
the fact that the new machine has a lower rate of defective frisbees than the
old one. But it is explained by the fact that the new machine also produces
far more frisbees than the old one.

The calculations you have just performed are an illustration of Bayes’s
tule, or Bayes’s theorem, which looks more complicated than it is.

Proposition 4.42 Bayes’s rule
Pr(D|B) *Pr(B)
Pr(D)
Pr(D|B) *Pr(B)
Pr(D|B) * Pr(B) + Pr(D|=B) * Pr(-B) *

Pr(B|D) =

Proof. The rule has two forms. The first form can be obtained from
Proposition 4.36 by dividing both sides of the equation by Pr(D). The
second form can be obtained from the first by applying the rule of
total probability (Proposition 4.39) to the denominator.

Exercise 4.43 Cancer, cont. Suppose that your patient from Exercise 4.40
dies in less than one year, before you learn whether he or she has type A or
type B cancer. Given that the patient died in less than a year, what is the probability he or she had type A cancer?

Exercise 4.44 Scuba diving certification, cont. You passed the scuba diving
test! Your friend says: “Not to rain on your parade, but you obviously got the
easy test.” Given that you passed, what is the probability that you got the
easy test?

Bayes’s rule is an extraordinarily powerful principle. To show how useful it
can be, consider the following problem. If it is not immediately obvious how
to attack this problem, it is almost always useful to draw a tree identifying the
probabilities.

Exercise 4.45 The dating game You are considering asking L out for a date,

but you are a little worried that L may already have started dating somebody

else. The probability that L is dating somebody else, you would say, is 1/4. If

Lis dating somebody else, he/she is unlikely to accept your offer to go on a

date: in fact, you think the probability is only 1/6. If Lis not dating somebody

else, though, you think the probability is much better: about 2/3.

(a) What is the probability that Lis dating somebody else but will accept your
offer to go on a date anyway?

(b) What is the probability that L is not dating somebody else and will accept
your offer to go ona date?

(c) What is the probability that L will accept your offer to go on a date?

(d) Suppose L accepts your offer to go on a date. What is the probability that
Lis dating somebody else, given that L agreed to go ona date?

===== PAGE 110 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment

There are more exercises on Bayes’s rule in sections 4.6 and 5.4. See also
Exercise 5.34 on page 113.

4.6 Bayesian updating

Bayes’s rule is often interpreted as describing how we should update our
beliefs in light of new evidence. We update beliefs in light of new evidence
all the time. In everyday life, we update our belief that a particular presidential candidate will win the election in light of evidence about how well he
or she is doing. The evidence here may include poll results, our judgments
about his or her performance in presidential debates, and so on. In science,
we update our assessment about the plausibility of a hypothesis or theory in
light of evidence, which may come from experiments, field studies, or other
sources. Consider, for example, how a person’s innocent belief that the Earth
is flat might be updated in light of the fact that there are horizons, the fact
that the Earth casts a circular shadow onto the Moon during a lunar eclipse,
and the fact that one can travel around the world. Philosophers of science talk
about the confirmation of scientific theories, so the theory of how this is done
is called confirmation theory. Bayes’s rule plays a critical role in confirmation
theory.

To see how this works, think of the problem of belief updating as follows:
what is at stake is whether a given hypothesis is true or false. If the hypothesis
is true, there is some probability that the evidence obtains. If the hypothesis is
false, there is some other probability that the evidence obtains. The question is
how you should change your belief — that is, the probability that you assign to
the possibility that the hypothesis is true — in light of the fact that the evidence
obtains. Figure 4.4 helps to bring out the structure of the problem.

Let H stand for the hypothesis and E for the evidence. The probability of H,
Pr(H), is called the prior probability: it is the probability that H is true before
you learn whether E is true. The probability of H given E, Pr(H|E), is called
the posterior probability: it is the probability that H obtains given that the
evidence E is true. The question is what the posterior probability should be.

PEI) p

Pr(aE\H) 7

Pr(E|nH)}

Pr(nH)
aH

Pre) TE

| Figure 4.4 | Cx@ Bayesian updating

91

===== PAGE 111 =====

92 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

This question is answered by a simple application of Bayes’s rule. Substituting

H for B and E for D in Proposition 4.42, we can write Bayes’s rule as follows:
Pr(E|H) * Pr(H)

Pr(E|H) *Pr(H) + Pr(E|H) *Pr(-H) ©

Pr(HIE)

The result tells you how to update your belief in the hypothesis H in light
of the evidence E. Specifically, Bayes’s rule tells you that the probability you
assign to H being true should go from Pr(H) to Pr(H|E). If you change your
beliefs in accordance with Bayes’s rule, we say that you engage in Bayesian
updating.

Suppose that John and Wes are arguing about whether a coin brought to
class by a student has two heads or whether it is fair. Imagine that there are no
other possibilities. For whatever reason, the student will not let them inspect
the coin, but she will allow them to observe the outcome of coin flips. Let H be
the hypothesis that the coin has two heads, so that =H means that the coin is
fair. Let us consider John first. He thinks the coin is unlikely to have two heads:
his prior probability, Pr(H), is only 0.01. Now suppose the student flips the
coin, and that it comes up heads. Let E mean “The coin comes up heads.” The
problem is this: What probability should John assign to H given that E is true?

Given Bayes’s rule, computing John’s posterior probability Pr(H|E) is
straightforward. We are given Pr(H) = 0.01, and therefore know that Pr(=H)
= 1 —- Pr(H) = 0.99. From the description of the problem, we also know the
conditional probabilities: Pr(E|H) = 1 and Pr(E|—>H) = 0.5. All that remains is
to plug the numbers into the theorem, as follows:

Pr(E|H) *Pr(H)
Pr(E|H) * Pr(H) + Pr(E|=H) * Pr(5H)

Pr(HIE)

1*0.01

—T¥0.01+05+099 ~ 90%

The fact that John’s posterior probability Pr(H|E) differs from his prior probability Pr(H) means that he updated his belief in light of the evidence. The
observation of heads increased his probability that the coin has two heads, as
it should. Notice how the posterior probability reflects both the prior probability and the evidence E.

Now, if John gets access to ever more evidence about the coin, there is no
reason why he should not update his belief again. Suppose that the student
flips the coin a second time and gets heads again. We can figure out what
John’s probability should be after observing this second flip by simply treating his old posterior probability as the new prior probability and applying
Bayes’s rule once more:

1*0.02
Pr(HIE) =F o02+05%098 ~ OO

Notice that his posterior probability increases even more after he learns that
the coin came up heads the second time.

===== PAGE 112 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment

Posterior
probability
1.0

0.5

0 5 10 15 20

No. of
trials

| Figure 4.5 | John’s and Wes’s probabilities after repeated trials

Exercise 4.46 Bayesian updating Suppose Wes, before the student starts
flipping the coin, assigns a probability of 50 percent to the hypothesis that it
has two heads.

(a) What is his posterior probability after the first trial?

(b) After the second?

Figure 4.5 illustrates how John’s and Wes’s posterior probabilities develop
as the evidence comes in. Notice that over time both increase the probability
assigned to the hypothesis. Notice, also, that their respective probabilities get
closer and closer. As a result, over time (after some 15-20 trials) they are in virtual agreement that the probability of the coin having two heads is almost 100
percent. We will return to questions of rational updating in the next chapter.
Until then, one last exercise.

Exercise 4.47 Bayesian updating, cont. Suppose that, on the third trial, instead
of flipping heads, the student flips tails. What would John’s and Wes’s posterior
probability be? To solve this problem, let E mean “The coin comes up tails.”

4.7 Discussion

In this chapter we have explored the theory of probability. The theory has
something of the feel of magic to it. When you are facing these difficult problems where untutored intuitions are conflicting or wide off the mark, all you
have to do is to apply the incantations (rules) in the right way and in the right
order and the answer pops right up! Anyway, probability theory is critical to
a wide range of applications, among other things as the foundations of statistical inference. It is relevant here because it can be interpreted as a theory
of judgment, that is, as a theory of how to revise beliefs in light of evidence.

93

===== PAGE 113 =====

94 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

The section on Bayesian updating (Section 4.6) shows how the argument goes.
As long as you are committed to the axioms and rules of the probability calculus, we established that you will (as a matter of mathematical necessity)
update your probabilities consistently with Bayes’s rule. Notice how neat
this is. While the theory says nothing about what your prior probabilities are
or should be, it does tell you exactly what your posterior probability will or
should be after observing the evidence.

How plausible is this theory? Again, we must separate the descriptive
question from the normative question. Do people in fact update their beliefs
in accordance with Bayes’s rule? Should they? The axioms might seem weak
and uncontroversial, both from a descriptive and from a normative standpoint.
Yet the resulting theory is anything but weak. As in the case of the theory of
choice under certainty, we have built a remarkably powerful theory on the
basis of a fairly modest number of seemingly weak axioms. It is important to
keep in mind that the theory is not as demanding as some people allege. It is
not intended to describe the actual cognitive processes you go through when
updating your beliefs: the theory does not say that you must apply Bayes’s theorem in your head. But it does specify exactly how your posterior probability
relates to your prior, given various conditional and unconditional probabilities.

In the next chapter, we will see how the theory fares when confronted with
evidence.

|| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 4.48 SAT test When you take the SAT test, you may think
that the correct answers to the various questions would be completely
random. In fact, they are not. The authors of the test want the answers to
seem random, and therefore they make sure that not all correct answers
are, say, (d). Consider the following three outcomes. A: The correct
answer to question 12 is (d). B: The correct answer to question 13 is (d).
C: The correct answer to question 14 is (d). Are outcomes A, B, and C
mutually exclusive, independent, both, or neither?

Exercise 4.49 Mr Langford Multiple lawsuits allege that area gambling establishments, on multiple occasions, doctored equipment so as
to give Birmingham mayor Larry Langford tens of thousands of dollars in winnings. Langford, already in prison for scores of corruptionrelated charges, has not denied winning the money; he does deny that
the machines were doctored.

We do not know exactly what the probability of winning the jackpot
on a machine that has not been doctored might be, but we can make
some intelligent guesses. Suppose that Langford on three occasions bet
$1 and won $25,000. For each jackpot, in order to break even, a gambling establishment needs 24,999 people who bet $1 and do not win. So
we might infer that the probability of winning when betting a dollar is
somewhere in the neighborhood of 1/25,000. If the establishment wants
to make a profit, which it does, the probability would have to be even
lower, but let us ignore this fact.

===== PAGE 114 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment 95

| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

What is the probability that Langford would win the jackpot three
times in a row when playing three times on undoctored machines?

Note that the probability that Langford would win three times in a row
given that the machines were not doctored is different from the conditional probability that the machines were not doctored given that
Langford won three times in a row.

Exercise 4.50 Economists go te Vegas According to professional lore,
economists are not welcome to organize large meetings in Las Vegas.
The reason is a sort of sin of omission. What is it economists, unlike most
normal people, allegedly do not do when in Vegas?

Exercise 4.51 Gender discrimination Imagine that an editorial board

of 20 members is all male.

(a) What is the probability that this would happen by chance alone
assuming that the board members are drawn from a pool of 1/2 men
and 1/2 women?

(b) Perhaps the pool of qualified individuals is not entire balanced in
terms of gender. What is the answer if the pool consists of 2/3 men
and 1/3 women?

(ec) And what if it is 4/5 men and 1/5 women?

Exercise 4.52 Softball A softball player’s batting average is defined
as the ratio of hits to at bats. Suppose that a player has a 0.250 batting
average and is very consistent, so that the probability of a hit is the
same every time she is at bat. During today’s game, this player will
be at bat exactly three times.

(a) What is the probability that she ends up with three hits?

(b) What is the probability that she ends up with no hits?

(c) What is the probability that she ends up with exactly one hit?

(d) What is the probability that she ends up with at least one hit?

Exercise 4.53 Gov. Schwarzenegger After vetoing a bill from the California State Assembly in 2009, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger
published a letter (see Figure 4.6). People immediately noticed that the
first letter on each line together spelled out a vulgarity. When confronted
with this fact, a spokesperson said: “Tt was just a weird coincidence.”

(a) Assuming that a letter has eight lines, and that each of the 26 letters
in the alphabet is equally likely to appear at the beginning of each
line, what is the probability that this exact message would appear by
chance?

It is true that the Governor writes many letters each year, which
means that the probability of any one letter spelling out this vulgarity is higher than your answer to (a) would suggest. Suppose that the
Governor writes 100 eight-line letters each year. What is the probability that at least one of them will spell out the vulgarity?

(b

a

===== PAGE 115 =====

96 Part2 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

To the Members of the California State Assembly:
I am returning Assembly Bill 1176 without
Imys...]

For some time now I have lamented the fact tha...
unnecessary bills come to me for consideration...
care are major issues my Administration has br...
kicks the can down the alley.

Yet another legislative year has come and gone...
overwhelmingly deserve. In light of this, and...
unnecessary to sign this measure at this time.

Sincerely,

Arnold Schwarzenegger

Im Figure 4.6 | elias Governor Schwarzenegger’s letter

Exercise 4.54 Max’s bad day Max is about to take a multiple-choice

test. The test has ten questions, and each has two possible answers:

“true” and “false.” Max does not have the faintest idea of what the right

answer to any of the questions might be. He decides to pick answers

randomly.

(a) What is the probability that Max will get all ten questions right?

(b) What is the probability that Max will get the first question wrong
and the other questions right?

(c) What is the probability that Max will get the second question wrong
and the other questions right?

(d) What is the probability that Max will get exactly nine questions
right?

(e) Max really needs to get an A on this test. In order to get an A, he
needs to get nine or more questions right. What is the probability
that Max will get an A?

Exercise 4.55 Pregnancy tests You are marketing a new line of preg-

nancy tests. The test is simple. You flip a fair coin. If the coin comes up

heads, you report that the customer is pregnant. If the coin comes up

tails, you report that the customer is not pregnant.

(a) Your first customer is a man. What is the probability that the test
accurately predicts his pregnancy status?

(b) Your second customer is a woman. What is the probability that the
test accurately predicts her pregnancy status?

(c) After you have administered the test ten times, what is the probability that you have not correctly predicted the pregnancy status of any
of your customers?

===== PAGE 116 =====

Chapter 4 Probability Judgment 97

| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

(d) After you have administered the test ten times, what is the probability that you correctly predicted the pregnancy status of at least one of
your customers?

Notice how high the probability of getting at least one customer right is.
This suggests the following scheme for getting rich. Issue ten, or a hundred, or whatever, newsletters offering advice about how to pick stocks.
No matter how unlikely each newsletter is to give good advice, if you
issue enough of them at least one is very likely to give good advice. Then
sell your services based on your wonderful track record, pointing to the
successful newsletter as evidence. You would not be the first. We will
return to this kind of problem in Section 5.3.

Problem 4.56 Pregnancy tests, cont. The pregnancy test of Exercise
4.55 is needlessly complicated. Here is another test that is even simpler: just
report that the customer is not pregnant. Roughly, what is the probability that
you would get the pregnancy status of a randomly selected college student
right when using the simplified test?

FURTHER READING

There are numerous introductions to probability theory. Earman and Salmon (1992) deals
with probability theory in the context of the theory of confirmation and is the source of
the stories about frisbees and coins (pp. 70-74); it also contains a discussion about the
meaning of probability (pp. 74-89). The Consumer Federation of America (2006) disCusses people's views about the most practicable way to get rich. The fate of Birmingham
mayor Larry Langford is discussed in Tomberlin (2009) and that of California governor
Arold Schwarzenegger in McKinley (2009).

===== PAGE 117 =====

CHAPTER
Judgment under Risk
and Uncertainty

5.1 Introduction

The previous chapter showed how a powerful theory of probabilistic judgment can be built on the foundation of a limited number of relatively uncontroversial axioms. Though the axioms might seem weak, the resulting theory
is anything but. In fact, the theory is open to criticism, especially on descriptive grounds. In this section, we consider whether the theory can serve as a
descriptively adequate theory, that is, whether it captures how people actually
make probabilistic judgments, and we explore a series of phenomena that suggest that it does not. The discrepancy suggests that a descriptively adequate
theory of judgment must differ from the theory that we just learned. We will
also continue our study of the building blocks of behavioral theory. In particular, we will continue the discussion of the heuristics-and-biases program in
Chapter 3, by reviewing more heuristics and discussing the biases that these
heuristics can lead to. Thus, this chapter gives a better idea of how behavioral
economists respond to discrepancies between observed behavior and standard theory.

5.2 The gambler’s fallacy

The notion of independence that we encountered in Section 4.3 is absolutely
critical in economics and finance. If you are managing investments, for example, you are supposed to diversify. It would be unwise to put all of your eggs
in one basket, investing all your money in a single asset such as Google stock.
But in order to diversify, it is not enough to invest in two or more assets: if
you invest in stocks that will rise and fall together, you do not actually have
a diversified portfolio. What you should do is to invest your money in assets
that are sufficiently independent. In real-world investment management, a
great deal of effort goes into exploring whether assets can be assumed to be
independent or not.

The notion of independence is also very important in fields like engineering. If you are in the process of designing a new nuclear power plant, you
should include multiple safety systems that can prevent nuclear meltdown.
But having five safety systems instead of one gives you additional safety only
when a breakdown in one system is sufficiently independent from a breakdown in the other. If, for example, all safety systems are held together with
one bolt, or plugged into the same outlet, a breakdown in the one system is
not independent from a breakdown in the other, and your plant will not be as

===== PAGE 118 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty 99

safe as it could be. In nuclear power plant design, and elsewhere, a great deal
of effort goes into making sure that different systems (if they are all critical to
the operation of the machine) are sufficiently independent from each other.

Exercise 5.1 The eggs and the basket Use the concept of independence to
explain why you should not put all of your eggs in one basket.

Exercise 5.2 The alarms Knowing that alarm clocks sometimes fail to go

off, some people set multiple alarms to make sure they will wake up in the

morning.

(a) In order to work as intended, should the different alarms be dependent or
independent?

(b) If you set multiple alarms on your smartphone, are they dependent or
independent?

In principle, there are two ways in which you might make a mistake about
independence: you may think that two outcomes are independent when in
fact they are not, or you may think that two outcomes are not independent
when in fact they are. People make both kinds of mistake. We will consider
them in order.

Thinking that two outcomes are independent when in fact they are not
happens, for instance, when people invest in stocks and bonds on the assumption that they are completely independent. In reality they are not. One of
the important take-home lessons of the recent economic crisis is that a vast
range of assets — US stocks, Norwegian real estate, etc. — are probabilistically
dependent because of the highly international nature of modern finance and
the complicated ways in which mortgages and the like are packaged and sold.
Thinking that two outcomes are independent when in fact they are not also
happens when people build nuclear power plant safety systems that have
parts in common or that depend on the sobriety of one manager or the reliability of one source of electric power.

Thinking that two outcomes are dependent when in fact they are not
occurs, for example, when people think that they can predict the outcome of
a roulette wheel based on its previous outcomes. People cannot: these things
are set up in such a way as to make the outcomes completely independent.
And they are set up that way because it is a good way for the casino to make
sure customers are unable to predict the outcomes. Nevertheless, many people believe that they can predict the outcome of a roulette game. For evidence,
the internet offers a great deal of advice about how to beat the casino when
playing roulette: “monitor the roulette table,” “develop a system,” “try the
system ona free table before operating it for financial gain,” and so on. Do an
internet search for “roulette tips,” and you will find a long list of webpages
encouraging you to think of various outcomes as probabilistically dependent,
when they are not.

Exercise 5.3 Winners Purveyors of lottery tickets are fond of posting signs
such as that in Figure 5.1. Of the two mistakes we have identified in this section, which one are they hoping you will make today?

===== PAGE 119 =====

100 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

$ WINNING
$ $1,000,000
$ LOTTERY
$ TICKET
$ SOLD HERE

Mage ice Winning ticket sold here

Exercise 5.4 Threes “Bad things always happen in threes,” people sometimes say, pointing to evidence such as the fact that Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix
and Jim Morrison all died within a few months of each other in late 1970 and
early 1971. What sort of mistake are these people making?

One specific case of thinking that two outcomes are dependent when in fact
they are not is the gambler’s fallacy: thinking that a departure from the average behavior of some system will be corrected in the short term. People who
think they are “due for” a hurricane or a car accident or the like because they
have not experienced one for a few years are committing the gambler’s fallacy.
Here, I am assuming that hurricanes and car accidents are uncorrelated from
year to year. It is possible that thinking you are due for a car accident makes
you more likely to have one; if so, a number of accident-free years might in
fact make it more likely for you to have an accident.
The following exercises illustrate how easy it is to go wrong.

Exercise 5.5 Gambler’s fallacy Carefully note the difference between the

following two questions:

(a) You intend to flip a fair coin eight times. What is the probability that you
end up with eight heads?

(b) You have just flipped a fair coin seven times and ended up with seven
heads. What is the probability that when you flip the coin one last time
you will get another heads, meaning that you would have flipped eight
heads in a row?

The gambler’s fallacy is sometimes explained in terms of representativeness. We came across heuristics in Section 3.6 on anchoring and adjustment.
According to the heuristics-and-biases program, people form judgments by
following heuristics, or rules of thumb, which by and large are functional but
which sometimes lead us astray. The representativeness heuristic is such a
heuristic. When you employ the representativeness heuristic, you estimate
the probability that some outcome was the result of a given process by reference to the degree to which the outcome is representative of that process. If
the outcome is highly representative of the process, the probability that the
former was a result of the latter is estimated to be high; if the outcome is
highly unrepresentative of the process, the probability is estimated to be low.

===== PAGE 120 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

The representativeness heuristic can explain the gambler’s fallacy if we
assume that a sequence like HHHHHHHH seems less representative of the
process of flipping a fair coin eight times than a sequence like HHHHHHHT,
which seems less representative than a sequence like HTTTHHTH. If you use
the representativeness heuristic, you will conclude that the first sequence is
less likely than the second, and that the second is less likely than the third. In
reality, of course, the three are equally likely ex ante.

Exercise 5.6 Representativeness Which of the following two outcomes will
strike people who use the representativeness heuristic as more likely: getting
4-3-6-2-1 or 6-6-6-6-6 when rolling five dice?

The representativeness heuristic might be perfectly functional in a wide variety of contexts. If it is used, for example, to infer that kind acts are more likely
to be performed by kind people, and that mean acts more likely to be performed by mean people, the representativeness heuristic can protect us from.
adverse events. But because it can generate predictable and systematic patterns of mistakes, it can lead to bias, just as anchoring and adjustment can. For
another example, consider the following case:

Exercise 5.7 Let us assume that whenever one gets pregnant, there is a

1/100 chance of having twins, and that being pregnant with twins once will

not affect the probability of being pregnant with twins later.

(a) You are not yet pregnant, but intend to get pregnant twice. What is the
probability that you will be pregnant with twins twice?

(b) You have just had a set of twins, and intend to get pregnant one more
time. What is the probability that you will end up pregnant with twins
again, that is, that you will have been pregnant with twins twice?

Again, having two sets of twins might strike a person as extraordinarily
unrepresentative of the process that generates children. Thus, people relying on the representativeness heuristic will think of the probability of having
a second set of twins conditional on having one set already as considerably
smaller than the probability of having a set of twins the first time around. But
by assumption, of course, these probabilities are equal.

Exercise 5.8 Mr Langford, cont. Suppose that Langford from Exercise 4.49
on pages 94-95 has just won two jackpots in a row and is about to play a third
time. What is the probability that he will win a third time, so as to make it
three jackpots in a row?

One way to explain the ubiquity of the gambler’s fallacy is to say that people
believe in the law of small numbers. That is, people exaggerate the degree
to which small samples resemble the population from which they are drawn.
In the case of the coins, the “population” consists of half heads and half tails.
A believer in the law of small numbers would exaggerate the degree to which
a small sample (such as a sequence of eight coin flips) will resemble the population and consist of half heads and half tails.

101

===== PAGE 121 =====

102 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

Itis important to note, however, that there are games of chance in which outcomes are correlated. In Blackjack, for example, cards are drawn from a deck
without being replaced, which means that the probability of drawing a given
card will vary from draw to draw. In principle, then, you can beat the house by
counting cards, which is why casinos reserve the right to throw you out if you do.

5.3 Conjunction and disjunction fallacies

We have already (in Section 4.3) come across the conjunction fallacy. “A anp B”
is a conjunction; you commit the conjunction fallacy when you overestimate
the probability of a conjunction. Consider the probability of winning the Lotto
6/49 (see Exercise 4.28 on page 85). When people learn the answer for the first
time they are often shocked at how low it is. They are, in effect, overestimating the probability that the first number is right anp the second number is
right AND ... and so on. Because they are overestimating the probability of a
conjunction, they are committing the conjunction fallacy.

Example 5.9 Boeing aircraft A Boeing 747400 has around 6 million parts.
Suppose that each part is very reliable and only fails with probability 0.000,001.
Assuming that failures are independent events, what is the probability that all
parts work?

The probability that any one part works is 0.999,999, so the probability that
all parts work is (0.999,999)°%0 = 0.0025 = 0.25 percent.

Given these numbers, the probability that all parts in a 747 work is only abouta
quarter of a percent! If this figure was lower than you expected, you may have
committed the conjunction fallacy. Still, airplane crashes remain rare because
planes are built with a great deal of redundancy, so that any one failure does
not necessarily lead to a crash. That said, not all machines can be built in this
way: some helicopters famously depend on a single rotor-retaining nut in
such a way that if the nut fails, the whole machine will come crashing down.
The term “Jesus nut” is sometimes used to denote a part whose failure would
lead to a breakdown of the whole system. Presumably, the name is due to the
only thing that can save you if the nut fails, though this assumes that a Jesus
intervention is sufficiently independent of a nut failure.

The conjunction fallacy is particularly important in the context of planning.
Complex projects are puzzles with many pieces, and typically each piece needs
to be in place for the project to be successful. Even if the probability that any one
piece will fall into place is high, the probability that all pieces of the puzzle will fall
into place may be low. Planners who commit the conjunction fallacy will overestimate the probability of the conjunction — the proposition that the first piece is in
place ann the second piece is in place AND the third piece is in place, and so on-—
meaning that they will overestimate the probability that the project will succeed.

The planning fallacy is the mistake of making plans based on predictions
that are unreasonably similar to best-case scenarios. Many projects — senior
theses, doctoral dissertations, dams, bridges, tunnels, railroads, highways, and

===== PAGE 122 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

wars — frequently take longer, and cost more, than planned. (Embarrassingly,
that includes the book you are reading.) Here are two famous examples:

Example 5.10 The Sydney Opera House Many people consider the Sydney
Opera House to be the champion of all planning disasters. According to original estimates in 1957, the opera house would be completed early in 1963 for
$7 million. A scaled-down version of the opera house finally opened in 1973
at a cost of $102 million.

Example 5.11 Rail projects In more than 90 percent of rail projects undertaken worldwide between 1969 and 1998, planners overestimated the number
of passengers who would use the systems by 106 percent. Cost overruns averaged 45 percent. Even more interestingly, estimates over the course of this
period did not improve. That is, knowing about others’ failed forecasts did not
prompt planners to make theirs more realistic.

There is a related fallacy called the disjunction fallacy. “A or B” is a disjunction;
you commit the disjunction fallacy when you underestimate the probability of a
disjunction. To illustrate, let us build upon Exercise 4.26(d) on page 82, in which
you computed the probability of rolling at least one six when rolling two dice.

Example 5.12 Compute the probability of getting at least one six when rolling (a) one die, (b) two dice, (c) three dice, (d) ten dice.

(a) The probability of rolling at least one six when rolling one die equals one
minus the probability of rolling a non-six, which equals 1 — 5/6 ~ 16.6 percent.
The probability of rolling at least one six when rolling two dice equals one
minus the probability of rolling no sixes in two trials, which equals 1 —
(6/6 ~ 30.6 percent.

The probability of rolling at least one six when rolling three dice equals
one minus the probability of rolling no sixes in three trials, which equals
1 — (5/6) ~ 42.1 percent.

Finally, the probability of rolling at least one six when rolling ten dice
equals one minus the probability of rolling no sixes in ten trials, which
equals 1 — (5/6) = 83.8 percent.

(b

rad

(c

~

(d

Rar

Notice how quickly the probability of rolling at least one six rises as the number of trials increases. The probability will never reach 100 percent, but it will
approach it asymptotically, so that it will get closer and closer as the number
of trials increases. If the resulting numbers here are greater than you expected,
you may have committed the disjunction fallacy. For the probability of rolling
at least one six in multiple trials equals the probability of rolling a six in the
first trial, or rolling a six in the second trial, or ... And given the definition
above, if you underestimate the probability of the disjunction, you are committing the disjunction fallacy.

Exercise 5.13 Hiking You plan to go ona hike in spite of the fact that a tornado watch is in effect. The national weather service tells you that for every
hour in your area, there is a 30 percent chance that a tornado will strike. That
is, there is a 30 percent chance that a tornado will strike your area between

103

===== PAGE 123 =====

104 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

10 am and 11 am, a 30 percent chance that a tornado will strike your area

between 11 am and noon, and so on.

(a) What is the probability of a tornado striking your area at least once during
a two-hour hike?

(b) What is the probability of a tornado striking your area at least once during
a three-hour hike?

(c) What is the probability of a tornado striking your area at least once during
a ten-hour hike?

Exercise 5.14 Flooding Imagine that you live in an area where floods occur

on average every ten years. The probability of a flood in your area is constant

from year to year. You are considering whether to live in your house for a few

more years and save up some money, or whether to move before you lose

everything you own in the next flood.

(a) What is the probability that there will no floods in your area over the
course of the next two years?

(b) What is the probability that there will be exactly one flood in your area
over the course of the next two years?

(c) What is the probability that there will be at least one flood over the course
of the next two years?

(d) What is the probability that there will be at least one flood over the course
of the next ten years?

Exercise 5.15 Terrorism Compute the probability that at least one major terrorist attack occurs over the course of the next ten years, given that there are
365.25 days in an average year, if the probability of an attack on any given day
is 0.0001.

That last exercise illustrates an infamous statement by the Irish Republican Army
(IRA), which for decades fought a guerilla war for the independence of Northern
Ireland from the United Kingdom and a united Ireland. In the aftermath of an
unsuccessful attempt to kill British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in 1984
by planting a bomb in her hotel, the IRA released a statement that ended with
the words: “You have to be lucky all the time. We only have to be lucky once.”
The disjunction fallacy is particularly important in the context of risk
assessment. When assessing the risk that some complex system will fail, it is
often the case that the system as a whole — whether a car or an organism — critically depends on multiple elements in such a way that the failure of any one
of these elements would lead to a breakdown of the system. Even if the probability that any one element will fail is low, the probability that at least one element will fail may be high. Assessors who commit the disjunction fallacy will
underestimate the probability of the disjunction — the proposition that the first
element fails or the second element fails or the third element fails, and so on —
meaning that they will underestimate the probability of a system breakdown.
There isan obvious symmetry between the two fallacies discussed in this section. According to de Morgan’s law, A&B is logically equivalent to >[—.A v B]
(see Section 2.4). So if you overestimate the probability Pr(A&B), this is the
same as saying that you overestimate Pr(s[-A v 7B)]). But by the not rule,
that is the same as saying that you overestimate 1 - Pr(-A v 7B), which is to

===== PAGE 124 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

say that you underestimate Pr(=A v —B). In the context of the Linda example,
overestimating the probability that she is a feminist bank teller is (according
to de Morgan’s law) the same as underestimating the probability that she is a
non-feminist or a non-bank teller. In sum, if you adhere to de Morgan’s law,
then you commit the conjunction fallacy if and only if you commit the disjunction fallacy.

Both the conjunction and disjunction fallacies can be explained in terms of
anchoring and adjustment (see Section 3.6). People overestimate the probability of conjunctions — and therefore commit the conjunction fallacy — if they use
the probability of any one conjunct as an anchor and adjust downwards insufficiently. They underestimate the probability of disjunctions — and therefore
commit the disjunction fallacy — if they use the probability of any one disjunct
as an anchor and adjust upwards insufficiently. Here are more exercises:

Exercise 5.16 What is the probability of drawing at least one ace when
drawing cards from an ordinary deck, with replacement, when you draw:
(a) 1 card, (b) 2 cards, (c) 10 cards, and (d) 52 cards?

Exercise 5.17 The birthday problem Suppose that there are 30 students in
your behavioral economics class. What is the probability that no two students
have the same birthday? To make things easier, assume that every student
was born the same non-leap year and that births are randomly distributed
over the year.

Exercise 5.18 The preface paradox In the preface to your new book, you
write that you are convinced that every sentence in your book is true. Yet you
recognize that for each sentence there is a 1 percent chance that the sentence
is false. (a) If your book has 100 sentences, what is the probability that at least
one sentence is false? (b) What if your book has 1000 sentences?

Finally, an exercise about aviation safety.

Exercise 5.19 Private jet shopping Suppose you are fortunate (or delusional) enough to be shopping for a private jet. You have to decide whether
to get a jet with one or two engines. Use p to denote the probability that an
engine fails during any one flight. A “catastrophic engine failure” is an engine
failure that makes the plane unable to fly.

(a) One of the jets you are looking to buy has only one engine. What is the
probability of a catastrophic engine failure during any one flight with this
plane?

(b) Another jet you are looking to buy has two engines, but is unable to fly
with only one functioning engine. Assume that engine failures are independent events. What is the probability of a catastrophic engine failure
during any one flight with this plane?

(c) Which jet strikes you as safer?

(d) What if the twin-engine jet can fly with only one functioning engine?

The answer to Exercise 5.19(b) is far from obvious. To help you out, consider
constructing a table as in Figure 4.1 on page 83.

105

===== PAGE 125 =====

106 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

5.4 Base-rate neglect

One source of imperfect reasoning about probabilities results from the confusion between conditional probabilities Pr(A|B) and Pr(B|A). It might seem
obvious that these two are distinct. As we know from Section 4.4, the probability that a randomly selected human being is a smoker is obviously different from the probability that a randomly selected smoker is a human being.
However, there are contexts in which it is easy to mix these two up. In this
section, we will consider some of these contexts.

Example 5.20 Mammograms Doctors often encourage women over a certain age to participate in routine mammogram screening for breast cancer.
Suppose that from past statistics about some population, the following is
known. At any one time, 1 percent of women have breast cancer. The test
administered is correct in 90 percent of the cases. That is, if the woman does
have cancer, there is a 90 percent probability that the test will be positive and
a 10 percent probability that it will be negative. If the woman does not have
cancer, there is a 10 percent probability that the test will be positive and a
90 percent probability that it will be negative. Suppose a woman has a positive test during a routine mammogram screening. Without knowing any other
symptoms, what is the probability that she has breast cancer?

When confronted with this question, most people will answer close to
90 percent. After all, that is the accuracy of the test. Luckily, we do not need to
rely on vague intuitions; we can compute the exact probability. In order to see
how, consider Figure 5.2, in which C denotes the patient having cancer and
P denotes the patient testing positive. Plugging the numbers into Bayes’s rule
(Proposition 4.42), we get:

Pr(P|C) * Pr(C)
Pr(P|C) * Pr(C) + Pr(P|=C) * Pr(=C)

Pr(C|P)

0.9#0.01
= 99%001+01%099 ~ 78:

Pr(P|C)

Pr(aPjcy ~ 7P

Pr(P|=C)

Pr(-P[ac) ~ 7P

| Figure 5.2 | Breast cancer screening

===== PAGE 126 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

Notice that the probability that somebody who has been identified as having
cancer in fact has cancer is not equal to — in fact, not even remotely similar
to — the accuracy of the test (which in this case is 90 percent). The probability
that the woman has cancer is only about 8 percent - much lower than people
think. This is paradoxical because we know that the test is reasonably good:
it gives the correct outcome in 90 percent of cases. What we are forgetting is
that relatively few people actually have cancer. Out of 1000 people, only about
ten can be expected to have cancer. Of those, nine will test positive. Of the 990
women who do not have cancer, only 10 percent will test positive, but that is
still 99 people. So only nine of the 108 people who test positive actually have
cancer, and that is about 8 percent. Notice that this case is similar to the frisbee
case: although the new machine has a lower failure rate than the old one, the
average frisbee produced in the factory is more likely than not to come from
the new machine, simply because it produces so many more frisbees.

The fraction of all the individuals in the population who have cancer (or
some other characteristic of interest) is called the base rate. In the cancer case,
the base rate is only one percent. One way to diagnose the mistake that people
make is to say that they fail to take the base rate properly into account. Thus,
the mistake is sometimes referred to as base-rate neglect or the base-rate fallacy. The judgment that we make in these situations should reflect three different factors: first, the base rate; second, the evidence; third, the conditional
probabilities that we would see the evidence when the hypothesis is true and
when it is false. We commit the base-rate fallacy when we fail to take the first
of these three factors properly into account.

Incidentally, this example makes it clear why younger women are not
routinely tested for breast cancer. In younger women, the base rate would be
even lower; so the ratio of true positives to all positives would be even lower.
Notice that in the previous example, when a woman from the relevant population gets a positive result the probability that she has cancer only increases
from one percent to about eight percent, which is not a very large increase. If
the base rate were even lower, the increase would be even smaller, and the
conditional probability Pr(C | P) would not be very different from the base rate
Pr(C). When this is the case, the test does not give the doctor any additional
information that is relevant when producing a diagnosis, and so the test is
said to be non-diagnostic. If the base rate were very high, the test would still
not be diagnostic. In order for a test to be diagnostic, it helps if the base rate is
somewhere in the middle.

Exercise 5.21 Mammograms, cont. Men can get breast cancer too, although
this is very unusual. Using the language of “base rates” and “diagnosticity,”
explain why men are not routinely tested for breast cancer.

Testimony can be non-diagnostic, as the following classic example illustrates.

Exercise 5.22 Testimony Acab company was involved ina hit-and-run accident at night. Two cab companies, the Green and the Blue, operate in the city.
You are given the following data: 85 percent of the cabs in the city are Green,
15 percent are Blue. A witness identified the cab involved in the accident as

107

===== PAGE 127 =====

108 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

Blue. The court tested the reliability of the witness under the same circumstances that existed on the night of the accident and concluded that the witness correctly identified each one of the two colors 80 percent of the time and
failed 20 percent of the time. What is the probability that the cab involved in
the accident was Blue rather than Green?

Exercise 5.23 lronBowl At an Auburn-Alabama game, 80 percent of attendees wore Alabama gear and 20 percent wore Auburn gear. During the game,
one of the attendees apparently robbed a beer stand outside the stadium.
A witness (who was neither an Alabama nor an Auburn fan) later told police
that the robber wore Auburn gear. The witness, however, was the beer stand’s
best customer, and it was estimated that he would only be able to identify the
correct gear about 75 percent of the time. What is the probability that the robber wore Auburn gear, given that the witness said that he did?

Here is a slightly different kind of problem.

Exercise 5.24 Down syndrome The probability of having a baby with Down
syndrome increases with the age of the mother. Suppose that the following is
true. For women 34 and younger, about one baby in 1000 is affected by Down
syndrome. For women 35 and older, about one baby in 100 is affected. Women
34 years and younger have about 90 percent of all babies. What is the probability that a baby with Down syndrome has a mother who is 34 years or younger?

Base-rate neglect helps explain the planning fallacy: the fact that plans and
predictions are often unreasonably similar to best-case scenarios (see Section
5.3). Notice that people who fall prey to the planning fallacy are convinced
that their own project will be finished on time, even when they know that the
vast majority of similar projects have run late.

From the point of view of the theory we explored in the previous chapter,
the planning fallacy is surprising. If people updated their beliefs in Bayesian
fashion, they would take previous overruns into account and gradually come
up with a better estimate of future projects. We can, however, understand the
optimistic estimates as a result of base-rate neglect. It is possible to think of
the fraction of past projects that were associated with overruns as the base
rate, and assume that people tend to ignore the base rate in their assessments.

The last problems in this section all relate to the war on terror.

Exercise 5.25 Jean Charles de Menezes In the aftermath of the July 21,
2005, terrorist attacks in London, British police received the authority to shoot
terrorism suspects on sight. On July 22, plainclothes police officers shot and
killed a terrorism suspect in the London underground. Use Bayes’s rule to
compute the probability that a randomly selected Londoner, identified by
the police as a terrorist, in fact is a terrorist. Assume that London is a city
of 10 million people, and that ten of them (at any given time) are terrorists.
Assume also that police officers are extraordinarily competent, so that their
assessments about whether a given person is a terrorist or not are correct
99.9 percent of the time.

===== PAGE 128 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

The suspect, Jean Charles de Menezes, 27, was shot seven times in the head
and once in the shoulder. He was later determined to be innocent. Notice,
again, that the probability that somebody who has been identified as a terrorist is in fact a terrorist is not equal to — in fact, not even remotely similar to — the
accuracy of the police officers’ assessments. Notice, also, the time line: in this
case, it is as though the police went out of their way to prove as soon as possible that they cannot be entrusted with the authority to execute people on sight.

Exercise 5.26 Behavior detection The following passage is from USA Today:

Doug Kinsey stands near the security line at Dulles International Airport, watching
the passing crowd in silence. Suddenly, his eyes lock on a passenger in jeans and a
baseball cap.

The man in his 20s looks around the terminal as though he’s searching for something. He chews his fingernails and holds his boarding pass against his mouth,
seemingly worried.

Kinsey, a Transportation Security Administration [TSA] screener, huddles with
his supervisor, Waverly Cousins, and the two agree: The man could be a problem.
Kinsey moves in to talk to him.

The episode this month is one of dozens of encounters airline passengers are
having each day — often unwittingly — with a fast-growing but controversial security technique called behavior detection. The practice, pioneered by Israeli airport
security, involves picking apparently suspicious people out of crowds and asking
them questions about travel plans or work. All the while, their faces, body language
and speech are being studied.

The TSA has trained nearly 2,000 employees to use the tactic, which is raising
alarms among civil libertarians and minorities who fear illegal arrests and ethnic
profiling. It’s also worrying researchers, including some in the Homeland Security
Department, who say it’s unproven and potentially ineffectual.

The government is unlikely to reveal data on the efficacy of this program,

but we can make some reasonable assumptions. Every month, roughly 60

million people fly on US carriers. Let us imagine that 6 of them are terrorists.

Let us also imagine that the TSA personnel are highly competent and will

correctly identify a person as a terrorist or non-terrorist in 98/100 of cases.

Questions:

(a) What is the probability that a passenger selected at random is a terrorist
and is correctly identified as such by TSA personnel?

(b) What is the probability that a passenger selected at random is not a tertorist but is nevertheless (incorrectly) identified as a terrorist by TSA
personnel?

(c) What is the probability that a passenger in fact is a terrorist conditional on
having been identified as such by TSA personnel?

(d) Is this test diagnostic?

Notice that in the story above, the man was apparently a false positive, meaning that the story inadvertently ended up illustrating the lack of diagnosticity
of the test.

Exercise 5.27 Diagnosticity Let us take it for granted that the behaviordetection test (from Exercise 5.26) is not diagnostic. The test may still be

109

===== PAGE 129 =====

110) Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

diagnostic in another setting, say, at a checkpoint at the US embassy in Kabul,
Afghanistan. Explain how this is possible.

Recent evidence suggests that behavior-detection agents are not in fact very
good at reading body language, in which case the program — which critics
call “security theater” - would not work in Kabul either. On a related note:
since 2004, the US Department of Homeland Security’s US-VISIT Program,
now called the Office of Biometric Identity Management, collects digital fingerprints and photographs from international travelers at US visa-issuing
posts and ports of entry. Before long, the database might contain hundreds
of millions of fingerprints. If a terrorist’s fingerprint — recovered from a crime
scene, perhaps — is found to match one in the database, what do you think
the probability is that the match is the actual terrorist? If you find yourself
caught up in this kind of dragnet, the only thing standing between you and
the electric chair might be a jury’s understanding of Bayes’s rule. Good luck
explaining it to them.

5.5 Confirmation bias

One striking feature of Bayesian updating in Section 4.6 is that John and Wes
come to agree on the nature of the coin so quickly. As you will recall, after
only about 15 flips of the coin, both assigned a probability of almost 100 percent to the possibility that the coin had two heads. People sometimes refer to
this phenomenon as washing out of the priors. That is, after so many flips,
John and Wes will assign roughly the same probability to the hypothesis, independently of what their priors used to be. This represents a hopeful picture
of human nature: when rational people are exposed to the same evidence,
over time they come to agree regardless of their starting point. (As is often the
case, things get tricky when probabilities are zero; I continue to ignore such
complications.)

In real life, unfortunately, people do not in general come to agree over
time. Sometimes that is because they are exposed to very different evidence:
conservatives tend to read conservative newspapers and blogs that present
information selected because it supports conservative viewpoints; liberals
tend to read liberal newspapers and blogs that present information selected
because it supports liberal viewpoints. Yet sometimes people have access to
the very same evidence presented in the very same way (as Wes and John do)
but nevertheless fail to agree over time. Why is this?

Part of the story is a phenomenon psychologists call confirmation bias: a
tendency to interpret evidence as supporting prior beliefs to a greater extent
than warranted. In one classic study, participants who favored or opposed
the death penalty read an article containing ambiguous information about the
advantages and disadvantages of the death penalty. Rather than coming to
agree as a result of being exposed to the same information, both groups of
people interpreted the information as supporting their beliefs. That is, after
reading the article, those who were previously opposed to the death penalty

===== PAGE 130 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty 111

Posterior
probability
1.0
0.5
0.0
ie) 5 10 16 20 No. of
trials

mI Figure 5.3 | Confirmation bias

were even more strongly opposed and those who favored it were even more
in favor. In the presence of confirmation bias, then, the picture of how people’s
beliefs change as they are exposed to the evidence may look less like Figure 4.5
on page 93 and more like Figure 5.3.

Exercise 5.28 Confirmation bias Imagine that John is suffering from confirmation bias. Which of the curves labeled A, B, and C in Figure 5.4 best represents the manner in which his probabilities change over time as the evidence
comes in?

Posterior
probability

1.0}

0.5 F---

0.0

| Figure 5.4 | John’s confirmation bias

===== PAGE 131 =====

112 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

Example 5.29 The jealous lover From literature or life, you may be familiar
with the character of the jealous lover, who refuses to accept any evidence
that his or her affections are reciprocated and who everywhere finds evidence
fueling suspicions. As Marcel Proust, author of In Search of Lost Time, wrote:
“It is astonishing how jealousy, which spends its time inventing so many
petty but false suppositions, lacks imagination when it comes to discovering
the truth.” In more prosaic terms, the jealous lover exhibits confirmation bias.

Confirmation bias can explain a whole range of phenomena. It can explain
why racist and sexist stereotypes persist over time. A sexist may dismiss or
downplay evidence suggesting that girls are good at math and men are able
to care for children but be very quick to pick up on any evidence that they are
not. A racist may not notice all the people of other races who work hard, feed
their families, pay their taxes, and do good deeds, but pay a lot of attention
to those who do not. Confirmation bias can also explain why people gamble.
Many gamblers believe that they can predict the outcome of the next game,
in spite of overwhelming evidence that they cannot (they may, for example,
have lost plenty of money in the past by mispredicting the outcomes). This
could happen if the gambler notices all the cases when he did predict the outcome (and if the outcome is truly random, there will be such cases by chance
alone) and fails to notice all the cases when he did not. The same line of thinking can explain why so many people think that they can beat the stock market,
in spite of evidence that (in the absence of inside information) you might as
well pick stocks randomly. Finally, confirmation bias can explain how certain
conspiracy theories survive in spite of overwhelming contradictory evidence.
The conspiracy theorist puts a lot of weight on morsels of evidence supporting the theory, and dismisses all the evidence undermining it.

Exercise 5.30 Reputation The fact that people exhibit confirmation bias
makes it very important to manage your reputation — whether you are a student, professor, doctor, lawyer, or brand. Why?

Scientists, by the way, are not immune from confirmation bias. Philosopher
of science Karl Popper noted how some scientists find data supporting their
theories everywhere. He describes his encounter with Alfred Adler, the pioneering psychoanalyst. In Popper’s words:

Once, in 1919, I reported to him a case which to me did not seem particularly
Adlerian, but which he found no difficulty in analysing in terms of his theory of
inferiority feelings, although he had not even seen the child. Slightly shocked, I
asked him how he could be so sure. “Because of my thousandfold experience,” he
replied; whereupon I could not help saying: “And with this new case, I suppose,
your experience has become thousand-and-one-fold.”

Popper’s description makes it sound as though Adler is suffering confirmation
bias in a big way. Sadly, it is easy to find similar examples in economics. Because
of how easy it is to “confirm” just about any theory, Popper ended up arguing
that the hallmark of a scientific theory was not the fact that it could be confirmed,
but rather that it could at least in principle be falsified — shown to be false by
empirical observation. A good question to ask yourself and others is: “What sort

===== PAGE 132 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

of evidence would make you change your mind?” If you cannot think of anything
short of divine intervention, you are almost surely suffering confirmation bias.

Problem 5.31 Confirmation bias among economisis

(a) Name two famous economists who in your view are suffering confirmation bias.

(b) Reflect upon the people you just named: if both are economists with whom you
disagree, your response to (a) might itself be an expression of confirmation bias.

Psychological research suggests that confirmation bias is due to a number
of different factors. First, people sometimes fail to notice evidence that goes
against their beliefs, whereas they quickly pick up on evidence that supports
them. Second, when the evidence is vague or ambiguous, and therefore admits
of multiple interpretations, people tend to interpret it in such a way that it
supports their beliefs. Third, people tend to apply a much higher standard of
proof to evidence contradicting their beliefs than to evidence supporting them.

Exercise 5.32 Destroying America Explain how book titles such as Demonic:
How the Liberal Mob Is Endangering America and American Fascists: The Christian
Right and the War on America contribute to political polarization.

Problem 5.33 Preventing confirmation bias In maiters of politics, philosophy, religion, and so on, do you expose yourself to the ideas of people “on the other
side” as you do to the ideas of people “on your side”? Are you paying as much attention to what they say? Are you applying the same standards of evidence? If you
can honestly answer yes to all these questions, you belong to a small but admirable
fraction of the population. If not, you might give it a try; it is an interesting exercise.

5.6 Availability

When physicians examine children with headaches, one of the things they look
for is brain tumors. The base rate is very low. Children with brain tumors are
virtually certain to have headaches, but there are of course many other causes of
headaches. As it happens, a simple examination successfully identifies the children with tumors in very many of the cases. That is, of all the children who have
been properly examined and judged not to have a tumor, very few actually do.

Exercise 5.34 CT scans In some populations, brain tumors in children are
rare: the base rate is only about 1/10,000. A child with a tumor is very likely to
have occasional headaches: 99 out of 100 do. But there are many other reasons
a child can have a headache: of those who do not have a tumor 1 in 10 have
occasional headaches.

(a) Given that a child has occasional headaches (H), what is the probability
that he or she has a brain tumor (T)?

(b) Let us say that among children with headaches, 999/1000 will ultimately
be fine (F). Suppose that a physician using a simple test can correctly determine whether the child will be fine or not in 95/100 of children with headaches. Given that the doctor after performing the test gives the patient a
green light (G), what is the probability that the child really will be fine?

113

===== PAGE 133 =====

114 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

As these exercises indicate, it is in fact very unlikely that the patient has a
brain tumor provided that he or she has been properly examined. CT scans
can determine almost conclusively whether the patient has a tumor, but they
are prohibitively expensive. Knowing that patients who have been examined
by a physician are unlikely to have a tumor, it is widely agreed that CT scans
under these conditions are unjustified. However, once a physician happens
to have a patient who turns out to have a tumor in spite of the fact that the
examination failed to find one, the physician’s behavior often changes dramatically. From then on, she wants to order far more CT scans than she previously did. Let us assume that the physician’s experience with the last child
did not change her values. Assuming that a drastic change in behavior must
be due to a change in values or a change in beliefs, it follows that her beliefs
must have changed. On the basis of what we know, did the physician update
her beliefs rationally?

The story is, of course, far more complicated than it appears here. It is
worth noticing, though, that the actual figures are widely known among
medical doctors. This knowledge reflects the accumulated experience of far
more cases than any one physician will see during her career. As a result, it
seems unlikely that rational updating on the basis of one single case should
have such a radical impact on a physician’s behavior. So what is going on?
Behavioral economists explain this kind of behavior in terms of availability:
the ease with which information can be brought to mind when making a judgment. When the physician faces her next patient, though she at some level of
consciousness still knows the figures that suggest a CT scan is uncalled for,
chances are that the last case (in which she failed to find the tumor) will come
to mind. It is particularly salient, in part because it happened recently, but also
because it is highly emotionally loaded.

The availability heuristic is another prominent heuristic from the
heuristics-and-biases program. When we rely on this heuristic, we assess the
probability of some event occurring by the ease with which the event comes to
mind. That is, the availability heuristic says that we can treat X as more likely
than Y if X comes to mind more easily than Y. As pointed out in Section 3.6,
heuristics are often perfectly functional. Suppose, for instance, that you happen to come across an alligator while walking to work. The chances are that
images of alligators attacking other animals (including humans) will come to
mind more easily than images of alligators acting cute and cuddly. If so, the
availability heuristic tells you to assume the alligator is likely to be dangerous,
which is obviously a helpful assumption under the circumstances. However,
the availability heuristic (being a simple rule of thumb) can sometimes lead
you astray, as in the case of the children with headaches. Thus, like anchoring
and adjustment, availability can lead to bias.

Exercise 5.35 Contacts Your optometrist tells you that your new contacts are
so good that you can wear them night and day for up to 30 days straight. She
warns you that there is some chance that you will develop serious problems,
but says that she has seen many clients and that the probability is low. After a
week, you develop problems and see an ophthalmologist. The ophthalmologist tells you that he is the doctor who removes people’s eyes when they have

===== PAGE 134 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

been injured as a result of improper contact use. He tells you that the probability of developing serious problems is high.

Use the concept of availability bias to explain how the optometrist and
the ophthalmologist can report such different views about the likelihood of
developing serious problems as a result of wearing contacts.

The availability heuristic can explain a variety of phenomena, including why
people think violent crime is more common than other kinds of crime. Violent
crime comes to mind so easily in part because images of violence can be particularly vivid, but also because it is covered so extensively in the press: “Area
Man Not Shot Today” would make for a terrible headline. Availability can also
explain why fears of airplane crashes, nuclear meltdowns, and terrorist attacks
tend to increase dramatically shortly after such events occur, for the obvious
reason that they come to mind particularly easily then. These considerations
can help us see why anti-vaccination sentiments are so strong in spite of overwhelming evidence that vaccines are safe and effective. If you have a child, or
even if you just hear of a child, who developed symptoms of autism shortly
after being vaccinated, the dramatic series of events is likely to be highly salient and therefore strike you as more likely than it really is. Availability can also
explain a variety of marketing practices. Advertising campaigns for grooming
products, cigarettes, alcohol, and all sorts of other products depict users of the
product as being particularly attractive and popular. If that is what comes to
mind when potential buyers reflect on the consequences of using the products, availability might make attractiveness and popularity seem particularly
likely outcomes. Availability can also explain why people repeat dangerous
behaviors. If they once, for whatever reason, do something dangerous or reckless — drive drunk, do hard drugs, have unprotected sex, or whatever — and
nothing bad happens, the salience of that event means that they might come to
think the dangers have been exaggerated, which will make them more likely
to engage in it again. Self-reinforcing cycles of this kind, especially when they
involve multiple individuals whose beliefs and behaviors reinforce each other’s, are called availability cascades.

The availability heuristic sheds light on the power of storytelling. As every
writer knows, stories are often far more compelling than scientific data. If you
doubt that, just ask a wolf. Wolves pose a trivial danger to humans: the number of verifiable, fatal attacks by wolves on humans is exceedingly low. And
yet, fear of wolves runs deep. Part of the explanation is certainly that there are
so many stories about big, bad wolves eating, e.g., little girls’ grandmothers.
As a result of all these stories, the idea of wolves attacking humans is highly
salient, which means that people treat it as likely - even though the data establish it is not. Far more dangerous organisms, such as the Salmonella bacterium.
that kills some 400 people per year in the US alone, do not figure in the public
imagination in the same way and consequently are not as feared as they probably should be. The power of storytelling can be harnessed to communicate
tisk information very effectively, but it can also do immense harm. A single
story about an illegal immigrant committing a heinous crime can generate
strong anti-immigration sentiments in spite of evidence of the beneficial welfare effects of migration.

115

===== PAGE 135 =====

116 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

Problem 5.36 Causes of death According to the World Health Organization,
the leading causes of death in the world are ischaemic heart disease, stroke, lower
respiratory infections, and chronic obstructive lung disease. This makes the leading causes of death quite different from the leading sources of fear. The effect is
that people spend relatively much time thinking about threats they can do litile
about (terrorist groups and epidemic diseases across the world, for example) and
relatively little time thinking about things they can (such as cardiovascular health,
which can be improved by exercise and diet). Availability can explain why people
overestimate the danger posed to them by the former and underestimate that by the
latter. But a no less interesting question is this: Can the power of availability and
other heuristics be harnessed to encourage people to think more about things such
as cardiovascular health?

Availability bias also helps explain the base-rate fallacy. Consider the cancer
case. Even if you know that there are false positives, so that a positive test does
not necessarily mean that you have the disease, the chances are cases of true
positives (people who were correctly diagnosed with cancer) are more likely
to come to mind than cases of false positives (people who were incorrectly
diagnosed with cancer). Insofar as you follow the availability heuristic, you
will think of true positives as more likely than false positives. Because the
actual probability of having the disease given a positive test is the ratio of true
positives to all positives, an overestimation of the probability of a true positive
will lead to an inflated probability of having the disease.

5.7 Overconfidence

Bayesian updating, as you know, can tell you precisely what probability you
should assign to an event given the available evidence. Such probabilities
are obviously relevant to statements of confidence: statements concerning
how certain you are that various things will happen. There are many ways
to express your confidence in a belief. After making an assertion, you can
add: “... and Iam 90 percent certain of that.” Or, you can say: “It’s 50-50,”
meaning that you are no more confident that the one thing will happen than
you are that the other thing will happen. If you are in the business of providing professional forecasts, you may be used to offering 95 percent confidence
intervals, which are ranges within which you expect the outcome to fall with
95 percent certainty. Thus, financial analysts might predict that a certain stock
will reach $150 next year, and add that they are 95 percent certain that the
value will be between $125 and $175; labor economists might predict that the
unemployment rate will hit 6 percent and add that they are 95 percent sure
that the actual unemployment range will fall in the 4-8 range. The more confident the analysts are in their predictive abilities, the narrower the confidence
intervals will be.

When assessing statements of confidence, behavioral economists talk
about calibration. Formally speaking, you are perfectly calibrated if, over the

===== PAGE 136 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

long run, for all propositions assigned the same probability, the proportion of
the propositions that are true equals the probability you assigned. If you are
calibrated and judge that something is 90 percent certain, nine times out of ten
you will be right about that thing. Notice that you can be calibrated even if
most of your predictions are wrong: if you are calibrated and 33 percent confident in your predictions, you will still be wrong two times out of three. Notice
also that it is possible to be calibrated even when outcomes cannot be precisely
predicted, e.g., because they are random. You do not know if an unbiased coin
will come up heads or tails when you flip it; but if you predict with 50 percent
confidence that it will come up heads, you will be perfectly calibrated.

All things equal, calibration seems to be a good thing. We certainly do
expect competent people to be calibrated: if a structural engineer tells you
he or she is 100 percent certain that a certain kind of house is safe to live in,
you will be disappointed in him or her when half the houses of that kind
collapse.

Yet, one of the most persistent findings in the literature is that people
tend to exhibit overconfidence. That is, like the structural engineer in the
previous paragraph, the certainty that people (including experts) express in
their judgments tends to exceed the frequency with which those judgments
are correct. In early studies, researchers asked undergraduates questions of
the type “Absinthe is (a) a liqueur or (b) a precious stone?” and invited them.
to judge how confident they were that their answer was right. Participants
who indicated that they were 100 percent certain that their answers were
tight were on the average correct 70-80 percent of the time. To test whether
increased motivation would decrease the degree of overconfidence, the
researchers asked participants to express their confidence in terms of odds
(see text box on page 83) and offered participants to play a gamble based
on those odds. When people said the odds that they were right were 100:1,
in order to be well calibrated they should have said 4:1; when they said
the odds were 100,000:1, they should have said 9:1. Though overconfidence
was first studied in the lab, over time manifestations of systematic overconfidence have been found also among physicists, doctors, psychologists,
CIA analysts, and others making expert judgments. Thus, overconfidence
appears outside the laboratory, when knowledgeable judges make assertions within their field of specialization, and when they are motivated to
provide accurate assessments.

Exercise 5.37 Meteorology Evidence suggests meteorologists are well calibrated and therefore an exception to the rule. This will strike many people
as literally unbelievable. What heuristic might cause them to underestimate
meteorologists’ ability to offer calibrated predictions?

Studies indicate that overconfidence increases with confidence, and therefore
is most extreme when confidence is high. Overconfidence is usually eliminated when confidence ratings are low, and when very low, people may even
be underconfident. Overconfidence also increases with the difficulty of the
judgment task. The more challenging the task is, the more likely a judge is to
be overconfident; when it comes to very easy judgments, people may even

117

===== PAGE 137 =====

118 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

be underconfident. Interestingly, overconfidence does not in general seem to
decrease when people become more knowledgeable. In one famous study, the
researcher asked participants in his study questions about the behaviors, attitudes, and interests of a real patient. As participants received more and more
information about the patient’s life, they assigned more and more confidence
to their answers. Yet, their accuracy barely increased at all. Incidentally, the
clinical psychologists who participated in the study — a majority of whom had
PhDs — were no more accurate and no less confident than psychology graduate students and advanced undergraduates. The more educated people were
actually more overconfident than the less educated people. It may well be true,
as Alexander Pope said, that “[a] little learning is a dangerous thing” - and a
lot of learning too.

Example 5.38 Apollo 11. On the 35th anniversary of the moon landing,
CNN asked the crew of Apollo 11 what their biggest concern was at the time.
Astronaut Neil Armstrong answered: “I think we tried very hard not to be
overconfident, because when you get overconfident, that’s when something
snaps up and bites you. We were ever alert for little difficulties that might crop
up and be able to handle those.”

Is there anything you can do to be less overconfident and more calibrated?
Research suggests that informing people about the prevalence of overconfidence makes little difference to their calibration. However, what does seem
to help is to make highly repetitive judgments and to receive regular, prompt
and unambiguous feedback. Moreover, overconfidence can be reduced by
considering reasons that you might be wrong.

How is it possible for overconfidence to be so prevalent? For starters,
many of our judgments are not repetitive, and we do not receive feedback that
is regular, prompt, and unambiguous. Furthermore, even in the presence of
outcome feedback, learning from experience is more difficult than one might
think. Confirmation bias (Section 5.5) makes us overweight evidence that
confirms our predictions and underweight evidence that disconfirms them;
in this way, confirmation bias makes us blind to our failures. Availability bias
(Section 5.6) does not help either. If the image of a situation where you were
right when others were spectacularly wrong comes to mind easily and often,
you might end up overestimating the probability that that sort of thing will
happen again. And a phenomenon referred to as hindsight bias — that is, the
tendency to exaggerate the probability that an event would occur by people
who know that it in fact did occur - plays other tricks with our minds. Victims
of the hindsight bias may never learn that past predictions were no good,
because they misremember what they in fact predicted and see no need to be
less confident in the future. Finally, people are very good at explaining away
false predictions, e.g., by arguing that they were almost right, or that any failures were due to inherently unpredictable factors.

The overconfidence phenomenon receives indirect support from research
on competence. For example, many studies suggest that people overestimate
their competence in various practical tasks. The vast majority of drivers — in
some studies, more than 90 percent — say that they are better than the median

===== PAGE 138 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty 119

The heuristics-and-biases program

According to the heuristics-and-biases program, we form judgments
by using heuristics — functional but imperfect rules of thumb or mental
shortcuts that help us form opinions and make decisions quickly. Here
are four prominent heuristics:

© The anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic instructs you to pick an
initial estimate (anchor) and adjust the initial estimate up or down
(as you see fit) in order to come up with a final answer. Therefore,
estimates will (imperfectly) track the anchors — even when irrelevant or uninformative.

© The representativeness heuristic tells you to estimate the prob-

ability that some outcome was the result of a given process by

teference to the degree to which the outcome is representative of

that process: the more representative the outcome, the higher the

probability.

The availability heuristic makes you assess the probability that

some event will occur based on the ease with which the event comes

to mind: the easier it comes to mind, the higher the probability.

© The affect heuristic gets you to assign probabilities to consequences based on how you feel about the thing they would be consequences of: the better you feel about it, the higher the probability
of good consequences and the lower the probability of bad.

The heuristics-and-biases program does not say that people are dumb:
to the contrary, it says that following heuristics is a largely functional
way to make speedy decisions when it counts. Because the heuristics are
imperfect, however, they can lead to bias, that is, systematic and predictable error.

Kahneman has proposed that the operation of heuristics can be understood in terms of substitution. When faced with a question we are unable to address directly, we sometimes replace it by an easier question and
answer that instead. Rather than addressing the question “How likely
is this airplane to crash?” we substitute the question “How easily can I
imagine this airplane crashing?” Substitution allows us to come up with
quick answers. But because the question we are actually answering is
different from the original one, the answer too might be different: while
airplane crashes are unlikely, mental representations of airplane crashes
are easy to conjure. Thus, we come to exhibit availability bias and exaggerate the probability of a crash. (Similar stories can be told about the
other heuristics.) The tricky thing is that we are unaware of the substitution and therefore of the difference between the answer we sought and
the one we produced.

===== PAGE 139 =====

120 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

driver, which is a statistical impossibility. In one fascinating study, undergraduates whose test scores in grammar and logic put them in the bottom
25 percent of a group of peers, on the mean estimated that they were well
above average. Even more surprising, perhaps, when participants received
more information about their relative performance in the tests (by being asked
to grade those of other participants), the strongest students became more calibrated, while the weakest students, if anything, became less calibrated. The
results suggest the least competent are at a double disadvantage, in that their
incompetence causes both poor performance and an inability to recognize
their performance as poor: the cognitive skill required to perform a difficult
mental task may well be tightly tied up with the metacognitive skill to assess
the quality of our performance. This Dunning—Kruger effect may or may
have been what comedian Ricky Gervais was getting at when he said: “When
you are dead, you do not know you are dead. It is only painful for others. The
same applies when you are stupid.”

Exercise 5.39 Inevitability People think many things are inevitable. If you
search for the expression “it was inevitable that” on Google News, you may
get more than ten thousands hits. Which bias is reflected in the use of that
expression?

Exercise 5.40 Adam Smith, once more What sort of phenomenon might
Adam Smith have had in mind when he talked about the “over-weening conceit which the greater part of men have of their own abilities”?

5.8 Discussion

This chapter has explored phenomena that appear inconsistent with the theory of probabilistic judgment that we learned about in Chapter 4. While the
theory of probability was never designed to capture the precise cognitive processes people use when forming judgments, there appears to be a wide range
of circumstances under which people’s intuitive probability judgments differ
substantially, systematically, and predictably from the demands of the theory.
As the examples have shown, differences can be costly. The phenomena are
typically construed as undercutting the adequacy of probability theory as a
descriptive theory. Yet some of these phenomena can also be invoked when
challenging the correctness of probability theory as a normative standard. The
fact that living up to the theory is so demanding - surely, part of the explanation for why people fail to live up to it in practice — is sometimes thought to
undercut its normative correctness.

We have also discussed some of the theoretical tools used by behavioral
economists to capture the manner in which people actually make judgments.
Thus, we explored further aspects of the heuristics-and-biases program,
which is one prominent effort to develop a descriptively adequate theory of
probabilistic judgment. Because heuristics are largely functional, it would be a
mistake to try to eliminate reliance on them altogether. But heuristics can lead

===== PAGE 140 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

us astray, and an awareness of the conditions under which this may happen
might reduce the likelihood that they do. As the marketing applications make
particularly clear, knowledge of behavioral economics in general, and heuristics and biases in particular, permits us to influence other people’s judgment,
for good or for evil. But knowledge of behavioral economics also permits us to
anticipate and to resist other people’s efforts to influence our judgment.

Exercise 5.41 Misguided criticism Some critics of the heuristics-and-biases
program attack it for saying that human beings are irredeemably stupid.
Thus, “the heuristics-and-biases view of human irrationality would lead us to
believe that humans are hopelessly lost in the face of real-world complexity,
given their supposed inability to reason according to the canon of classical
rationality, even in simple laboratory experiments.” Explain where these critics go wrong.

Needless to say, the chapter does not offer a complete list of phenomena that
are inconsistent with standard theory or of the theoretical constructs designed
to explain them. One important heuristic that has not come up yet is the affect
heuristic. This heuristic tells you to assign probabilities to consequences based.
on how you feel about the thing they would be consequences of: the better you
feel about it, the higher the probability you assign to good consequences and
the lower the probability you assign to bad. As a result, those who love guns
will think of scenarios in which guns are beneficial as relatively more likely,
and scenarios in which guns are harmful as relatively less likely, than those
who hate guns. Like other heuristics, the affect heuristic is often functional:
when you see something you really do not like the look of in the back of your
fridge, you will think the probability that you will get sick from eating it as
telatively high - which is likely the proper response. But the affect heuristic
can also lead you astray, by making beliefs about benefits and risks reflect feelings rather than the other way around.

The next part of the book will explore how the theory of probability can be
incorporated into a theory of rational decision, and explores its strengths and
weaknesses.

| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 5.42 Probability matching Imagine that your friend Anne has
a coin that has a 2/3 probability of coming up heads (H) and a 1/3 probability of coming up tails (T). She intends to flip it three times and give
you a dollar for every time you correctly predicted how the coin would
come up. Would you be more likely to win if you predicted that the coin
will come up HHH or HHT?

If your prediction was HHT (or HTH or THH) you might have engaged
in probability matching: choosing frequencies so as to match the

121

===== PAGE 141 =====

122 Part 2

Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

|| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

probabilities of the relevant events. Probability matching might result
from the use of the representativeness heuristic, since an outcome like
HHT (or HTH or THH) might seem so much more representative for the
random process than HHH or TTT. As the exercise shows, probability
matching is a suboptimal strategy leading to bias.

Exercise 5.43 Gender discrimination, cont. In Exercise 4.51 on page 95,
we computed the probability that an editorial board of 20 members is all
male by chance alone. If the answer strikes a person as low, what fallacy
may he or she have committed?

Exercise 5.44 IVF In vitro fertilization (IVF) is a procedure by which
egg cells are fertilized by sperm outside the womb. Let us assume that
any time the procedure is performed the probability of success (meaning
a live birth) is approximately 20 percent. Let us also assume, though this
is unlikely to be true, that the probabilities of success at separate trials are
independent. Imagine, first, that a woman has the procedure done twice.
(a) What is the probability that she will have exactly two live births?

(b) What is the probability that she will have no live births?

(c) What is the probability that she will have at least one live birth?
Imagine, next, that another woman has the procedure done five times.
(d) What is the probability that she will have at least one live birth?

Exercise 5.45 Mandatory drug testing In July 2011, the state of Florida
started testing all welfare recipients for the use of illegal drugs. Statistics
suggest that some 8 percent of adult Floridians use illegal drugs; let
us assume that this is true for welfare recipients as well. Imagine that
the drug test is 90 percent accurate, meaning that it gives the correct
response in nine cases out of ten.

(a) What is the probability that a randomly selected Floridian welfare
recipient uses illegal drugs and has a positive test?

(b) What is the probability that a randomly selected Floridian welfare
recipient does not use illegal drugs but nevertheless has a positive
test?

(c) What is the probability that a randomly selected Floridian welfare
recipient has a positive test?

(d) Given that a randomly selected Floridian welfare recipient has a
positive test, what is the probability the he or she uses illegal drugs?

(e) If a Florida voter favors the law because he thinks the answer to
(d) is in the neighborhood of 90 percent, what fallacy might he be
committing?

Exercise 5.46 CIA Intelligence services are deeply interested in how people think, both when they think correctly and when they think incorrectly.
The following exercise is borrowed from the book Psychology of Intelligence
Analysis, published by the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).

===== PAGE 142 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty 123

| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

During the Vietnam War, a fighter plane made a non-fatal strafing attack
on a US aerial reconnaissance mission at twilight. Both Cambodian and
Vietnamese jets operate in the area. You know the following facts: (a) Specific
case information: The US pilot identified the fighter as Cambodian. The
pilot’s aircraft recognition capabilities were tested under appropriate visibility and flight conditions. When presented with a sample of fighters (half
with Vietnamese markings and half with Cambodian) the pilot made correct
identifications 80 percent of the time and erred 20 percent of the time. (b) Base
rate data: 85 percent of the jet fighters in that area are Vietnamese; 15 percent
are Cambodian.

Question: What is the probability that the fighter was Cambodian rather
than Vietnamese?

Exercise 5.47 Juan Williams In October 2010, National Public Radio
(NPR) fired commentator Juan Williams after he made the following
remark on Fox News: “When I get on a plane ... if I see people who are
in Muslim garb and I think, you know, they’re identifying themselves
first and foremost as Muslims, I get worried. I get nervous.” Here, I will
not comment on the wisdom of firing somebody for expressing such a
sentiment or of expressing it in the first place. But we can discuss the
rationality of the sentiment.

(a) In the United States, there are roughly 300 million people, of whom
about 2 million are Muslims. Let us assume that at any one time there
are ten terrorists able and willing to strike an airliner, and that as
many as nine out of ten terrorists are Muslims. Under these assumptions, what is the probability that a randomly selected Muslim is a
terrorist able and willing to strike an airliner?

(b) Use the notion of availability bias to explain how Juan Williams
might overestimate the probability that a randomly selected Muslim
is a terrorist able and willing to strike an airliner.

Exercise 5.48 Theories, theories Complete this sentence: “If all your
observations support your scientific theories or political views, you are
(probably) suffering...”

Exercise 5.49 Matthew Which heuristic is embodied in this line from
Matthew 7:17-18: “So every good tree bears good fruit, but the bad tree
bears bad fruit. A good tree cannot produce bad fruit, nor can a bad tree
produce good fruit.”

Exercise 5.50 Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) A person
opposed to GMOs reads a compelling text about the benefits of such
organisms and comes to quite like the thought of them. When asked
about the risks, he says he has changed his mind and decided that not
only are the benefits great, but the risks are trivial too — although he has
acquired no new information about the risks. What heuristic might have
been in play here?

===== PAGE 143 =====

124 Part 2 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty

|| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

Exercise 5.51 Schumpeter The Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter
claimed that he had set himself three goals in life: to be the greatest economist in the world, the best horseman in all of Austria, and the greatest
lover in all of Vienna. He confessed that he had only reached two of the
three goals. Suppose that he was wrong and had, in fact, reached none
of them. Use each of the following ideas to explain how he might be
so wrong: (a) confirmation bias, (b) availability bias, (c) overconfidence,
(d) conjunction fallacy.

Exercise 5.52 Match each of the vignettes below with one of the following phenomena: availability bias, base-rate neglect, confirmation bias,
conjunction fallacy, disjunction fallacy, hindsight bias, and overconfidence. If
in doubt, pick the best fit.

(a) Al has always been convinced that people of Roma descent are
prone to thievery. In fact, several of his co-workers have a Roma
background. But he knows his co-workers are not thieves, and he
does not think twice about it. One day during happy hour, however,
an old acquaintance shares a story about two people “who looked
like gypsies” stealing goods from a grocery store. “I knew it!” Al
says to himself.

(b) Beth’s car is falling apart. Her friends, who know these things, tell
her that the car has a 10 percent probability of breaking down every
mile. Beth really wants to go see a friend who lives about ten miles
away, though. She ponders the significance of driving a car that has
a 10 percent probability of breaking down each mile, but figures
that the probability of the car breaking down during the trip cannot
be much higher than, say, 15 percent. She is shocked when her car
breaks down half way there.

(c) Cecile is so terrified of violent crime that she rarely leaves her house,
even though she lives in a safe neighborhood. She is out of shape,
suffers from hypertension, and would be much happier if she went
for a walk every so often. However, as soon as she considers going
for a walk, images of what might happen to innocent people quietly
strolling down the sidewalk come to mind, and she is sure something horrible is going to happen to her too. As a result, she goes
back to watching reruns of Law and Order.

(d) David, who has never left the country, somehow manages to get

tested for malaria. The test comes back positive. David has never

been so depressed. Convinced that he is mortally sick, he starts to
draft his will.

Because she has trouble getting up in the morning, Elizabeth often

drives too fast on her way to school. After getting a speeding ticket

on Monday last week, she religiously followed the law all week.

Only this week is she starting to drive faster again.

(e

=

===== PAGE 144 =====

Chapter 5 Judgment under Risk and Uncertainty 125

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

(f) Fizzy does not think the US will want to start another front in the
war on terror, so she believes that it is quite unlikely that the US will
bomb Iranian nuclear facilities. She does, however, think that it is
quite likely that the US will withdraw all troops from Afghanistan.
When asked what she thinks about the possibility that the US
will bomb Iranian nuclear facilities and withdraw all troops from
Afghanistan, she thinks that it is more likely than the possibility that
the US will bomb Iranian nuclear facilities.

(g) Georgina has trouble imagining an existence without Apple computers and iPads. Thus, she thinks it was inevitable that a man like
Steve Jobs would appear and design such things.

(h) Harry lost all his luggage the last time he checked it. He is never
going to check his luggage again, even if it means having unpleasant
arguments with flight attendants.

Problem 5.53 Drawing on your own experience, make up stories like
those in Exercise 5.52 to illustrate the various ideas that you have read about
in this chapter.

FURTHER READING

A comprehensive introduction to heuristics and biases in judgment is Hastie and Dawes
(2010). The gambler’s fallacy and related mistakes are discussed in Tversky and
Kahneman (1971). The conjunction and disjunction fallacies are explored in Tversky and
Kahneman (1983) and in Tversky and Shafir (1992). The planning fallacy and the Sydney
Opera House are discussed in Buehler et al. (1994, p. 366); Kahneman (2011) reports
the data about rail projects. Base-rate neglect is examined in Bar-Hillel (1980). The USA
Today story is Frank (2007). An extensive review of confirmation bias is Nickerson (1998);
the quotation from /n Search of Lost Time is Proust (2002 [1925], p. 402) and the study
of confirmation bias in the context of the death penalty is Lord et al. (1979). Popper (2002
[1963], p. 46) describes meeting Adler. Availability is discussed alongside anchoring and
adjustment and representativeness in Tversky and Kahneman (1974). The section on
overconfidence draws on Angner (2006), which argues that economists acting as experts
in matters of public policy exhibit significant overconfidence even within their domain of
expertise. Neil Armstrong is cited in O’Brien (2004). The study by Fischhoff and colleagues
is Fischhoff et al. (1977), the study involving a real patient is Oskamp (1982), and the
study on competence is Kruger and Dunning (1999). Kahneman (2011, Chapter 9) discusses substitution and Smith (1976 [1776], p. 120) our “over-weening conceit.” The critics of the heuristics-and-biases program are Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996); the affect
heuristic appears in Finucane et al. (2000). The CIA’s intelligence analysis example comes
from Heuer (1999, pp. 157-8) and the Juan Williams affair is described in Farhi (2010).

===== PAGE 145 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 146 =====

PART

Choice under
Risk and

Uncertainty

6 Rational Choice under Risk and
Uncertainty

6.1 Introduction

6.2 Uncertainty

6.3 Expected value

6.4 Expected utility

6.5 Attitudes toward risk

6.6 Discussion

7 Decision-Making under Risk and
Uncertainty

7.1 Introduction

7.2 Framing effects in decision-making
under risk

7.3 Bundling and mental accounting

7.4 The Allais problem and the sure-thing
principle

7.5 The Ellsberg problem and ambiguity aversion

7.6 Probability weighting

7.7 Discussion

===== PAGE 147 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 148 =====

CHAPTER
Rational Choice under
Risk and Uncertainty

6.1 Introduction

In Part 2, we left the theory of decision aside for a moment in order to talk
about judgment. Now it is time to return to questions of decision, and specifically, rational decision. In this chapter we explore the theory of rational
choice under risk and uncertainty. According to the traditional perspective,
you face a choice under uncertainty when the probabilities of the relevant
outcomes are completely unknown or not even meaningful; you face a choice
under risk when the probabilities of the relevant outcomes are both meaningful and known. At the end of the day, we want a theory that gives us principled answers to the question of what choice to make in any given decision
problem. It will take a moment to develop this theory. We begin by discussing
uncertainty and then proceed to expected value, before getting to expected
utility. Ultimately, expected-utility theory combines the concept of utility from.
Chapter 2 with the concept of probability from Chapter 4 into an elegant and
powerful theory of choice under risk.

6.2 Uncertainty

Imagine that you are about to leave your house and have to decide whether
to take an umbrella or to leave it at home (Figure 6.1). You are concerned that
it might rain. If you do not take the umbrella and it does not rain, you will
spend the day dry and happy; if you do not take the umbrella and it does rain,
however, you will be wet and miserable. If you take the umbrella, you will be
dry no matter, but carrying the cumbersome umbrella will infringe on your
happiness. Your decision problem can be represented as in Table 6.1(a).

Ina table like this, the left-most column represents your menu, that is, the
options available to you. Other than that, there is one column for each thing
that can happen. These things are referred to as states of the world or simply
states, listed in the top row. Together, they constitute the outcome space. In
this case, obviously, there are only two states: either it rains, or it does not.
Nothing prevents expressing your preferences over the four outcomes by
using our old friend the utility function from Section 2.7. Utility payoffs can
be represented as in Table 6.1(b). Under the circumstances, what is the rational
thing to do? Let us assume that you treat this as a choice under uncertainty.
There are a number of different criteria that could be applied.

According to the maximin criterion, you should choose the alternative that
has the greatest minimum utility payoff. If you take the umbrella, the minimum

===== PAGE 149 =====

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

| Figure 6.1 | Ready for rain? Illustration by Cody Taylor

payoff is three; if you leave the umbrella at home, the minimum payoff is zero.
Consequently, maximin reasoning would favor taking the umbrella. According
to the maximax criterion, you should choose the alternative that has the greatest maximum utility payoff. If you take the umbrella, the maximum payoff is
three; if you leave the umbrella at home, the maximum payoff is five. Thus,
maximax reasoning would favor leaving the umbrella at home. The maximin
reasoner is as cautious as the maximax reasoner is reckless. The former looks at
nothing but the worst possible outcome associated with each act, and the latter
looks at nothing but the best possible outcome associated with each act. Some of
my students started referring to the maximax criterion as the YOLO criterion —
from “You Only Live Once,” for the reader unfamiliar with millennial.

Table 6.1. Umbrella problem
Rain No rain

Take umbrella Dry,nothappy Dry, not happy
Leave umbrella Wet, miserable Dry, happy

(a) Payoffs
Rain No rain Rain No rain
Take umbrella 3 3 Take umbrella 0 2
Leave umbrella 0 5 Leave umbrella 3 0
(b) Utility payoffs (c) Risk payoffs

Exercise 6.1 The watch Having just bought a brand new watch, you are
asked if you also want the optional life-time warranty.

(a) Would a maximin reasoner purchase the warranty?

(b) What about a maximax reasoner?

===== PAGE 150 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

There are other criteria as well. According to the minimax-risk criterion, you
should choose the alternative that is associated with the lowest maximum risk
or regret. If you take the umbrella and it rains, or if you leave the umbrella at
home and it does not rain, you have zero regrets. If you take the umbrella and
it does not rain, your regret equals the best payoff you could have had if you
had acted differently (five) minus your actual payoff (three), that is, two. By
the same token, if you leave the umbrella at home and it does rain, your regret
equals three. These “risk payoffs” can be captured in table form, as shown in
Table 6.1(c). Since bringing the umbrella is associated with the lowest maximum regret (two, as opposed to three), minimax-risk reasoning favors taking
the umbrella. The term regret aversion is sometimes used when discussing
people’s tendency to behave in such a way as to minimize anticipated regret.
Regret aversion may be driven by loss aversion (see Section 3.5), since regret is
due to the loss of a payoff that could have resulted from the state that obtains,
had the agent acted differently. (We return to the topic of regret in Section 7.4.)

Exercise 6.2 Rational choice under uncertainty This exercise refers to the utility matrix of Table 6.2. What course of action would be favored by (a) the maximin criterion, (b) the maximax criterion, and (c) the minimax-risk criterion? As
part of your answer to (c), make sure to produce the risk-payoff matrix.

Table 6.2 Decision under uncertainty

5, 5,
A 1 10
B 2 9
c 3 6

Quite a number of authors have offered advice about how to minimize regret.
In The Picture of Dorian Gray, Oscar Wilde wrote: “Nowadays most people die
of a sort of creeping common sense, and discover when it is too late that the
only things one never regrets are one’s mistakes.” And books with titles such
as The Top Five Regrets of the Dying aspire to tell us what we too might one
day come to regret: working too much, trying to please others, not allowing
ourselves to be happy, and so on. Then again, Seren Kierkegaard — sometimes
called “the father of existentialism” — altogether despaired of avoiding regret.
“My honest opinion and my friendly advice is this: Do it or do not do it - you
will regret both,” he wrote in a book titled Either/Or.

Problem 6.3 The dating game under uncertainty Imagine that you are

considering whether or not to ask somebody out on a date.

(a) Given your utility function, what course of action would be favored by (i) the maximin criterion, (ii) the maximax criterion, and (iii) the minimax-risk criterion?

(b) In the words of Alfred, Lord Tennyson, “’Tis better to have loved and lost / Than
never to have loved at all.” What decision criterion do these lines advocate?

Of all criteria for choice under uncertainty, the maximin criterion is the most
prominent. It is, among other things, an important part of the philosopher John.

131

===== PAGE 151 =====

132 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Rawls’s theory of justice. In Rawls’s theory, the principles of justice are the terms
of cooperation that rational people would agree to follow in their interactions
with each other if they found themselves behind a “veil of ignorance,” meaning that they were deprived of all morally relevant information about themselves, the society in which they live, and their place in that society. Suppose,
for example, that you have to choose whether to live either in a society with
masters and slaves or in a more egalitarian society, without knowing whether
(in the former) you would be master or slave. According to Rawls, the rational
procedure is to rank societies in accordance with the worst possible outcome
(for you) in each society — that is, to apply the maximin criterion — and to choose
the more egalitarian option. Rawls took this to constitute a reason to think that
an egalitarian society is more just than a society of masters and slaves.

Critics have objected to the use of maximin reasoning in this and other scenarios. One objection is that maximin reasoning fails to consider relevant utility
information, since for each act, it ignores all payoffs except the worst. Consider
the two decision problems in Table 6.3. Maximin reasoning would favor A in
either scenario. Yet it does not seem completely irrational to favor A over B and
B* over A, since B* but not B upholds the prospect of ten billion utiles.

Table 6.3 More decisions under uncertainty

s, §, Ss, S,

A 1 1 A 1 1

B 0 10 B* 0 10°
@) (b)

Another objection is that maximin reasoning fails to take into account the
chances that the various states of the world will obtain. In a famous critique of
Rawls’s argument, Nobel prize-winning economist John C. Harsanyi offered
the following example:

Example 6.4 Harsanyi’s challenge Suppose you live in New York City and
are offered two jobs at the same time. One is a tedious and badly paid job in
New York City itself, while the other is a very interesting and well-paid job in
Chicago. But the catch is that, if you wanted the Chicago job, you would have
to take a plane from New York to Chicago (for example, because this job would
have to be taken up the very next day). Therefore, there would be a very small
but positive probability that you might be killed in a plane accident.

Assuming that dying in a plane crash is worse than anything that could happen on the streets of New York, as Harsanyi points out, maximin reasoning
would favor the tedious NYC job, no matter how much you prefer the Chicago
job and no matter how unlikely you think a plane accident might be. This does
not sound quite right.

Perhaps there are scenarios in which the probabilities of the relevant outcomes are completely unknown or not even meaningful, and perhaps in those
scenarios maximin reasoning — or one of the other criteria discussed earlier

===== PAGE 152 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

in this section — is appropriate. Yet the upshot is that, whenever possible, it is
perfectly reasonable to pay attention to all possible payoffs as well as to the
probabilities that the various states might obtain. When facing the umbrella
problem in Table 6.1, for example, it seems rational to take into account all
four cells in the payoff matrix as well as the probability of rain.

6.3 Expected value

From now on I will assume that it is both meaningful and possible to assign
probabilities to outcomes; that is, we will be leaving the realm of choice under
uncertainty and entering the kingdom of choice under risk. In this section,
we explore one particularly straightforward approach — expected value — that
takes the entire payoff matrix as well as probabilities into account.

The expected value of a gamble is what you can expect to win on the average, in the long run, when you play the gamble. Suppose I make you the following offer: I will flip a fair coin, and I will give you $10 if the coin comes up
heads (H), and nothing if the coin comes up tails (T). This is a reasonably good.
deal: with 50 percent probability you will become $10 richer. This gamble can
easily be represented in tree and table form, as shown in Figure 6.2. It is clear
that on the average, in the long run, you would get $5 when playing this gamble; in other words, the expected value of the gamble is $5. That is the same
as the figure you get if you multiply the probability of winning (1/2) by the
dollar amount you stand to win ($10).

Exercise 6.5 Lotto 6/49 Represent the gamble accepted by someone who
plays Lotto 6/49 (from Exercise 4.28 on page 85) as in Figure 6.2(a) and (b).
Assume that the grand prize is a million dollars.

Example 6.6 Lotto 6/49, cont. What is the expected value of a Lotto 6/49
ticket, if the grand prize is a million dollars?

We know from Exercise 4.28 that the ticket is a winner one time out of
13,983,816. The means that the ticket holder will receive, on the average, in the

a
12 $0
t
{a)
H T
Offer $10 $0

(b)

Simple gamble

133

===== PAGE 153 =====

134 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

long run, 1/13,983,816 * $1,000,000. You get the same answer if you multiply
the probability of winning by the amount won: 0.000,000,07 * $1,000,000 =
$0.07. That is 7 cents.

Problem 6.7 What would you pay to play this gamble? If you are willing to pay
to play this game, what do you hope to achieve?

Sometimes two or more acts are available to you, in which case you have a
choice to make. Imagine, for instance, that you can choose between the gamble in Figure 6.2 and $4 for sure. If so, we can represent your decision problem
in tree form as shown in Figure 6.3(a). We can also think of the outcome of
rejecting the gamble as $4 no matter whether the coin comes up heads or tails.
Thus, we can think of the gamble as identical to that in Figure 6.3(b). The latter
decision tree makes it obvious how to represent this gamble in table form (see
Figure 6.3(c)). The numbers in the row marked “Reject” represent the fact that
if you reject the gamble, you keep the four dollars whether or not it turns out
to be a winner.

1/2 $10

1/2 $0

$4
(a)

Accept $10 $0
Reject $4 $4

{c)

| Figure 6.3 | Choice between gambles

===== PAGE 154 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty 135

Exercise 6.8 Expected value For the following questions, refer to Figure 6.3(c).
(a) What is the expected value of accepting this gamble?
(b) What is the expected value of rejecting it?

You may be wondering if all gambles can be represented in table form: they
can. Consider, for instance, what would happen if you win the right to play
the gamble from Figure 6.2 if you flip a coin and it comes up heads. If so, the
complex gamble you are playing would look like Figure 6.4(a). The key to
analyzing more complex, multi-stage gambles like this is to use one of the anD
tules to construct a simpler one. In this case, the gamble gives you a 1/4 probability of winning $10 and a 3/4 probability of winning nothing. Hence, the
gamble can also be represented as in Figure 6.4(b). This makes it obvious how
to represent the complex gamble in table form, as in Figure 6.4(c). There can
be more than two acts or more than two states. So, in general, we end up with
a matrix like Table 6.4. By now, it is obvious how to define expected value.

Definition 6.9 Expected value Given a decision problem as in Table 6.4, the
expected value EV(A,) of an act A, is given by:

EV(A) = Pr(S,)*C, +Pr(S,)*C, + ... +Pr(5,)*C,,

=> Pr(S)C,,
jel
H
1/2 $10
H
1/2
$0
W207
1/2
7 90
{a)
HH
1/4 $10
3/4 $0
Not-HH
(b)
HH = HH

Gamble $10 $0
(c)

| Figure 6.4 | [em Multi-stage gamble

===== PAGE 155 =====

136 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

If this equation looks complicated, notice that actual computations are easy.
For each state — that is, each column in the table — you multiply the probability
of that state occurring with what you would get if it did; then you add all your
numbers up. If you want to compare two or more acts, just complete the procedure for each act and compare your numbers. As you can tell, this formula
gives some weight to each cell in the payoff matrix and to the probabilities
that the various states of the world will obtain.

Table 6.4 The general decision problem

The table form is often convenient when computing expected values, since
it makes it obvious how to apply the formula in Definition 6.9. The fact that
more complex gambles can also be represented in table form means that the
formula applies even in the case of more complex gambles. Hence, at least as
long as outcomes can be described in terms of dollars, lives lost, or the like, the
concept is well defined. To illustrate how useful this kind of knowledge can
be, let us examine decision problem that you might encounter in casinos and
other real-world environments.

Exercise 6.10 Roulette A roulette wheel has slots numbered 0, 00, 1, 2, 3, ...,
36 (see Figure 6.5). The players make their bets, the croupier spins the wheel,
and depending on the outcome, payouts may or may not be made. Players can
make a variety of bets. Table 6.5 lists the bets that can be made as well as the
associated payoffs for a player who wins after placing a one-dollar bet. Fill in
the table.

Im Figure 6.5 | Roulette table

===== PAGE 156 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Table 6.5 Roulette bets

Bet Description Payout Pr(win) Expected Value
Straight Up One number $36
Split Two numbers $18
Street Three numbers $12
Corner Four numbers $9
First Five 0, 00, 1, 2,3 $7
Sixline Six numbers $6
First 12 1-12 $3
Second 12 13-24 $3
Third 12 25-36 $3
Red $2
Black $2
Even $2
Odd $2
Low 1-18 $2
High 19-36 $2

Exercise 6.11 Parking You are considering whether to park legally or illegally and decide to be rational about it. Use negative numbers to represent
costs in your expected-value calculations.

(a) Suppose that a parking ticket costs $30 and that the probability of getting
a ticket if you park illegally is 1/5. What is the expected. value of parking
illegally?

(b) Assuming that you use expected-value calculations as a guide in life,
would it be worth paying $5 in order to park legally?

It is perfectly possible to compute expected values when there is more than
one state with a non-zero payoff.

Example 6.12 You are offered the following gamble: if a (fair) coin comes
up heads, you receive $10; if the coin comes up tails, you pay $10. What is the
expected value of this gamble?

The expected value of this gamble is 1/2 * 10 + 1/2 * (—10) =0.

Exercise 6.13 Suppose somebody intends to roll a fair die and pay you $1 if
she rolls a one, $2 if she rolls a two, and so on. What is the expected value of
this gamble?

137

===== PAGE 157 =====

138 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Exercise 6.14 Deal or No Deal You are on the show Deal or No Deal, where
you are facing so many boxes, each of which contains some (unknown)
amount of money (see Figure 6.6). At this stage, you are facing three boxes.
One of them contains $900,000, one contains $300,000, and one contains $60,
but you do not know which is which. Here are the rules: if you choose to open
the boxes, you can open them in any order you like, but you can keep the
amount contained in the last box only.

(a) What is the expected value of opening the three boxes?

(b) The host gives you the choice between a sure $400,000 and the right to
open the three boxes. Assuming you want to maximize expected value,
which should you choose?

(c) You decline the $400,000 and open a box. Unfortunately, it contains the
$900,000. What is the expected value of opening the remaining two boxes?

(d) The host gives you the choice between a sure $155,000 and the right to
open the remaining two boxes. Assuming you want to maximize expected
value, which should you choose?

Expected-value calculations form the core of cost-benefit analysis, which
is used to determine whether all sorts of projects are worth undertaking.
Corporations engage in cost-benefit analysis to determine whether to invest
in a new plant, start a new marketing campaign, and so on. Governments
engage in cost-benefit analysis to determine whether to build bridges, railways, and airports; whether to incentivize foreign corporations to relocate
there; whether to overhaul the tax system; and many other things. The basic
idea is simply to compare expected benefits with expected costs: if the benefits
exceed or equal the cost, the assumption is that it is worth proceeding, otherwise not.

So far, we have used our knowledge of probabilities to compute expected
values. It is also possible to use Definition 6.9 to compute probabilities, provided that we know enough about the expected values. So, for example, we
can ask the following question.

J

og

Mmgclicmensm Deal or No Deal

===== PAGE 158 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Example 6.15 Parking, cont. If a parking ticket costs $30, and it costs $5
to park legally, what does the probability of getting a ticket need to be for
the expected value of parking legally to equal the expected value of parking
illegally?

We solve this problem by setting up an equation. Assume, first of all, that
the probability of getting a parking ticket when you park illegally is p. Assume,
further, that the expected value of parking illegally equals the expected value
of parking legally: p * (—30) = —5. Solving for p, we get that p = —5/-30 =
1/6. This means that if the probability of getting a ticket is 1/6, the expected
values are identical. If p is greater than 1/6, the expected value of parking
legally is greater than the expected value of parking illegally; if p is lower than
1/6, the expected value of parking legally is smaller than the expected value
of parking illegally.

Exercise 6.16 Parking, cont. Assume that the cost of parking legally is still $5.

(a) If the parking ticket costs $100, what does the probability need to be for
the expected value of parking legally to equal the expected value of parking illegally?

(b) What if the ticket costs $10?

Problem 6.17 Parking, cont. Given what you pay for parking and given what
parking fines are in your area, what does the probability of getting a ticket need to
be for the expected value of parking legally to equal the expected value of parking
illegally?

There is a whole field called law and economics that addresses questions such
as this, exploring the conditions under which it makes sense for people to
break the law, and how to design the law so as to generate the optimal level
of crime.

Exercise 6.18 Lotto 6/49, cont. Suppose a Lotto 6/49 ticket costs $1 and that
the winner will receive $1,000,000. What does the probability of winning need
to be for this lottery to be actuarially fair, that is, for its price to equal its
expected value?

Exercise 6.19 Warranties A tablet computer costs $325; the optional oneyear warranty, which will replace the tablet computer at no cost if it breaks,
costs $79. What does the probability p of the tablet computer breaking need
to be for the expected value of purchasing the optional warranty to equal the
expected value of not purchasing it?

As this example suggests, the price of warranties is often inflated relative to
the probability that the product will break (for the average person, anyway).
Unfortunately, when used as a guide in life, expected-value calculations
have drawbacks. Obviously, we can only compute expected values when
consequences can be described in terms of dollars, lives lost, or similar. The
definition of expected value makes no sense if the consequences C,, are not
expressed in numbers. Moreover, under many conditions expected-value

139

===== PAGE 159 =====

140 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

considerations give apparently perverse advice, and therefore cannot serve
as a general guide to decision-making in real life. Consider, for example, what
to do if you have 30 minutes in a casino before the mafia comes after you to
reclaim your debts. Assuming that you will be in deep trouble unless you
come up with, say, $10,000 before they show up, gambling can be a very reasonable thing to do, even if the expected values are low. Consider, finally, the
following famous example.

Example 6.20 St Petersburg paradox A gamble is resolved by tossing an
unbiased coin as many times as necessary to obtain heads. If it takes only one
toss, the payoff is $2; if it takes two tosses, it is $4; if it takes three, it is $8; and
so forth (see Table 6.6). What is the expected value of the gamble?

Notice that the probability of getting heads on the first flip (H) is 1/2; the
probability of getting tails on the first flip and heads on the second (TH) is
1/4; the probability of getting tails on the first two flips and heads on the third
(TTH) is 1/8; and so on. Thus, the expected value of the gamble is:

FR GQt TH GEE Ee S84
$1 + $1 + $1 +... = $e.

In sum, the expected value of the gamble is infinite. This means that if you try
to maximize expected value, you should be willing to pay any (finite) price for
this gamble. That does not seem right, which is why the result is called the St
Petersburg paradox. And it would not seem right even if you could trust that
you would receive the promised payoffs no matter what happens.

Table 6.6 St Petersburg gamble

H TH TTH
St Petersburg gamble $2 $4 $8.

6.4 Expected utility

Our calculations in Section 4.4 suggested that games like Lotto 6/49 are simply not worth playing (see Exercise 4.28). But the story does not end there. For
one thing, as our deliberations in this chapter have illustrated, the size of the
prize matters (see, for instance, Example 6.6). Equally importantly, a dollar is
not as valuable as every other dollar. You may care more about a dollar bill
if it is the first in your pocket than if it is the tenth. Or, if the mafia is coming
after you to settle a $10,000 debt, the first 9999 dollar bills may be completely
useless to you, since you will be dead either way, whereas the 10,000th can
save your life.

To capture this kind of phenomenon, and to resolve the St Petersburg paradox, we simply reintroduce the concept of utility from Section 2.7. The utility
of money is often represented in a graph, with money (or wealth, or income)

===== PAGE 160 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

ix) rrr tae

0 $10,000 x

| Figure 6.7 | The utility of money

on the x-axis and utility on the y-axis. In Figure 6.7, for example, the dashed
line represents the expected value of money if u(x) = x; the solid line represents the utility of money if the mafia is coming after you, and the dotted line
represents the case when a dollar becomes worth less and less as you get more
of them, that is, when the marginal utility of money is diminishing. When the
curve bends downwards when you move to the right, as the dotted line does,
it is said to be concave.

For most goods, it is probably true that the marginal utility is diminishing. When buying a newspaper from a box, you put a few coins in the slot,
open a door, and grab a newspaper from the stack. Nothing prevents you
from grabbing two or more copies, but most people do not. Why? Newspaper
boxes work because the marginal utility of newspapers is sharply diminishing. While the first copy of the Wall Street Journal permits you to learn what is
going on in the markets, subsequent copies are best used to make funny hats
or to wrap fish. There are exceptions to the rule, however. Beer is not sold like
newspapers, and for good reason: its marginal utility is not diminishing and
may even be increasing. As you may have read in a book, after people have
had a beer, a second beer frequently seems like an even better idea than the
first one did, and so forth. This is why a beer — as in “Let’s have a beer” - is a
mythical animal not unlike unicorns.

How does this help? Consider the St Petersburg gamble from Section 6.3.
Let us assume that the marginal utility for money is diminishing, which seems
plausible.

Table 6.7 St Petersburg gamble with utilities

H TH TTH
St Petersburg gamble log(2) log(4) log(8)

141

===== PAGE 161 =====

142 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Mathematically, the utility of a given amount of money x might equal the logarithm of x, so that u(x) = log(x). If so, we can transform Table 6.6 into a table in
which consequences are expressed in utilities instead of dollars (see Table 6.7).
Now, we can compute the expected utility of the gamble. The expected utility
of a gamble is the amount of utility you can expect to gain on the average, in the
long run, when you play the gamble. In the case of the St Petersburg gamble,
the expected utility is:

1 1 1
3 *log(2) + m1 *log(4) + 3 *log(8)+ ... ~ 0.602 < ,

This way, the expected utility of the St Petersburg gamble is well-defined and
finite. (In Example 6.37 we will compute what the gamble is worth in dollars
and cents.) Formally, this is how we define expected utility:

Definition 6.21 Expected utility Given a decision problem like Table 6.4, the
expected utility EU (A) of an act A, is given by:

EU(A) = Pr(S,)*u(C,,) + Pr(S,)*u(C,) + ... + Pr(S,)*u(C,,)

=> Pr(syu(c,)
jel

Somebody who chooses that option with the greatest expected utility is said
to engage in expected-utility maximization. Examples like the St Petersburg
paradox suggest that expected-utility maximization is both a better guide to
behavior, and a better description of actual behavior, than expected-value
maximization. That is, the theory of expected utility is a better normative
theory, and a better descriptive theory, than the theory of expected value.
Computing expected utilities is not much harder than computing expected
values, except that you need to multiply each probability with the utility of
each outcome.

Example 6.22 Expected utility Consider, again, the gamble from Figure 6.3(c).
Suppose that your utility function is u(x) = Vx. Should you accept or reject the
gamble?

The utility of rejecting the gamble is EU(R) = u(4) = V4 = 2. The utility of
accepting the gamble is EU(A) = 1/2 * u(10) + 1/2 * u(0) = 1/2 * V10 ~ 1.58.
The rational thing to do is to reject the gamble.

Exercise 6.23 Expected utility, cont. Suppose instead that your utility function is u(x) = x7.

(a) What is the expected utility of rejecting the gamble?

(b) What is the expected utility of accepting the gamble?

(c) What should you do?

When the curve bends upwards as you move from left to right, like the utility
function u(x) = x? does, the curve is said to be convex.

===== PAGE 162 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Exercise 6.24 Lotto 6/49, cont. Assume still that your utility function is

u(x) = Vx, that the probability of winning at Lotto 6/49 is one in 13,983,816,

and that the prize is a million dollars.

(a) What is the expected utility of holding a Lotto ticket?

(b) What is the expected utility of the dollar you would have to give up in
order to receive the Lotto ticket?

(c) Which would you prefer?

Exercise 6.25 Expected utility, again Suppose that you are facing three gam-

bles. A gives you a 1/3 probability of winning $9. B gives you a 1/4 probabil-

ity of winning $16. C gives you a 1/5 probability of winning $25.

(a) What is the expected utility of each of these gambles if your utility function is u(x) = Vx, and which one should you choose?

(b) What is the expected utility of each of these gambles if your utility function is u(x) = x?, and which one should you choose?

Exercise 6.26 Expected value and expected utility Assume again that your
utility function is u(x) = Vx. Compute (i) the expected value and (ii) the
expected utility of the following gambles:

(a) G: You have a 1/4 chance of winning $25 and a 3/4 chance of winning $1.
(b) G*: You have a 2/3 chance of winning $7 and a 1/3 chance of winning $4.

Another major advantage of the expected-utility framework is that it can be
applied to decisions that do not involve consequences expressed in terms of
dollars, lives lost, or the like. The expected-utility formula can be used quite
generally, as long as it is possible to assign utilities to all outcomes. That is to
say that expected utilities can be calculated whenever you have preferences
over outcomes — which you do, if you are rational. Hence, expected-utility
theory applies, at least potentially, to all decisions. The following exercises
illustrate how expected-utility reasoning applies even when consequences are
not obviously quantifiable.

Exercise 6.27 Hearing loss A patient with hearing loss is considering
whether to have surgery. If she does not have the surgery, her hearing will
get no better and no worse. If she does have the surgery, there is an 85 percent
chance that her hearing will improve, and a five percent chance that it will
deteriorate. If she does not have the surgery, her utility will be zero. If she does
have the surgery and her hearing improves, her utility will be ten. If she does
have the surgery but her hearing is no better and no worse, her utility will be
minus two. If she does have the surgery and her hearing deteriorates, her utility will be minus ten.

(a) Draw a tree representing the decision problem.

(b) Draw a table representing the problem.

(c) What is the expected utility of not having the operation?

(d) What is the expected utility of having the operation?

(e) What should the patient do?

143

===== PAGE 163 =====

144 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Exercise 6.28 Thanksgiving indecision Suppose you are contemplating
whether to go home for Thanksgiving. You would like to see your family, but
you are worried that your aunt may be there, and you genuinely hate your
aunt. If you stay in town you are hoping to stay with your roommate, but then
again, there is some chance that she will leave town. The probability that your
aunt shows up is 1/4, and the probability that your roommate leaves town
is 1/3. The utility of celebrating Thanksgiving with your family without the
aunt is 12 and with the aunt is minus two. The utility of staying in your dorm
without your roommate is three and with the roommate is nine.

(a) Draw a decision tree.

(b) Calculate the expected utility of going home and of staying in town.

(c) What should you do?

Exercise 6.29 Pascal’s wager The French seventeenth-century mathemati-

cian and philosopher Blaise Pascal suggested the following argument for a

belief in God. The argument is frequently referred to as Pascal’s wager. Either

God exists (G), or He does not (4G). We have the choice between believing (B)

or not believing (-B). If God does not exist, it does not matter if we believe

or not: the utility would be the same. If God does exist, however, it matters a

great deal: if we do believe, we will enjoy eternal bliss; if we do not believe,

we will burn in hell.

(a) Represent the decision problem in table form, making up suitable utilities
as you go along.

(b) Let p denote the probability that G obtains. What is the expected utility of
B and =B?

(c) What should you do?

Notice that it does not matter what p is. B dominates —B in the sense that B is
associated with a higher expected utility no matter what.

Of course, Definition 6.21 can also be used to compute probabilities provided that we know enough about the expected utilities. So, for example, we
can ask the following kinds of question.

Example 6.30 Umbrella problem, cont. This question refers to Table 6.1(b),
that is, the umbrella problem from Section 6.2. If the probability of rain is p,
what does p need to be for the expected utility of taking the umbrella to equal
the expected utility of leaving it at home?

To answer this problem, set up the following equation: EU (Take umbrella)
= EU (Leave umbrella). Given the utilities in Table 6.1(b), this implies that 3 =
p*0 + (1 — p)*5, which implies that p = 2/5.

Exercise 6.31 Indifference This question refers to Table 6.2. Let p denote the

probability that S, obtains.

(a) If an expected-utility maximizer is indifferent between A and B, what is
his p?

(b) If another expected-utility maximizer is indifferent between B and C,
what is her p?

(c) Ifa third expected-utility maximizer is indifferent between A and C, what
is their p?

===== PAGE 164 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

6.5 Attitudes toward risk

As you may have noticed already, expected-utility theory has implications for
attitudes toward risk. Whether you reject a gamble (as in Example 6.22) or
accept it (as in Exercise 6.23) depends, at least to some extent, on the shape
of your utility function. This means that we can explain people’s attitudes
toward risk in terms of the character of their utility function.

The theory of expected utility can explain why people often reject a gamble
in favor of a sure dollar amount equal to its expected value. We simply have to
add to the theory of expected utility the auxiliary assumption of diminishing
marginal utility of money.

Example 6.32 Risk aversion Suppose you own $2 and are offered a gamble
giving you a 50 percent chance of winning a dollar and a 50 percent chance of
losing a dollar. This decision problem can be represented as in Figure 6.8. Your
utility function is u(x) = Vx, so that marginal utility is diminishing. Should
you take the gamble?

The problem can be represented as in Table 6.8. Expected-utility calculations show that you should reject the gamble, since EU(Accept) =
U2 *V3 41/2 * VI ~ 1.37 and EU(Reject) = V2 ~ 141.

Table 6.8 Another gambling problem

Win (1/2) Lose (1/2)
Accept (A) V3 v1
Reject (R) v2 v2

An expected-value maximizer would have been indifferent between accepting and rejecting this gamble, since both expected values are $2. Trivially, then,
if your utility function is u(x) = x, you will be indifferent between the two
options. For comparison, consider the following problem.

Exercise 6.33 Risk proneness Consider, again, the gamble in Figure 6.8.
Now suppose that your utility function is u(x) = x’. Unlike the previous utility
function, which gets flatter when amounts increase, this utility function gets

12 “gg

$1
1/2 T

$2
R

| Figure 6.8 | ese Risk aversion

145

===== PAGE 165 =====

146 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

steeper. Compute the expected utilities of accepting and rejecting the gamble.
What should you do?

As all these examples suggest, the shape of your utility function relates to
your attitude toward risk — or your risk preference — in the following way.
Whether you should reject or accept a gamble with an expected value of zero
depends on whether your utility function gets flatter or steeper (bends downwards or upwards). In general, we say that you are risk averse if you would
reject a gamble in favor of a sure dollar amount equal to its expected value,
tisk prone if you would accept, and risk neutral if you are indifferent. Thus,
you are risk averse if your utility function bends downwards (as you move
from left to right), risk prone if your utility function bends upwards, and risk
neutral if your utility function is a straight line.

Notice that the theory itself does not specify what the shape of your utility function should be. Most of the time, economists will assume that utility
for money is increasing, so that more money is better. But that is an auxiliary
assumption, which is no part of the theory. The theory does not constrain your
attitude toward risk; it does not even say that your attitude toward risk has to
be the same when you get more (or less money). For instance, you may have
a utility function that looks like the solid line in Figure 6.9. Here, you are risk
prone in the range below x* and risk averse in the range above x*. Or, you
may have a utility function that looks like the dashed line. Here, you are risk
averse in the range below x* and risk prone in the range above x*. The next
exercise illustrates the manner in which attitudes toward risk are expressed in
a variety of real-world behaviors.

Exercise 6.34 Attitudes to risk As far as you can tell, are the following people risk prone, risk averse, or risk neutral?

(a) People who invest in the stock market rather than in savings accounts.
(b) People who invest in bonds rather than in stocks.

u(x)

LMmgellcmemcm S-shaped utility functions

===== PAGE 166 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

(c) People who buy lottery tickets rather than holding on to the cash.
(d) People who buy home insurance.

(e) People who play roulette.

(f} People who consistently maximize expected value.

(g) People who have unsafe sex.

Sometimes it is useful to compute the certainty equivalent of a gamble. The
certainty equivalent of a gamble is the amount of money such that you are
indifferent between playing the gamble and receiving the amount for sure.

Definition 6.35 Certainty equivalent The certainty equivalent of a gamble G
is the number CE that satisfies this equation: u(CE) = EU(G).

The certainty equivalent represents what the gamble is worth to you. The certainty
equivalent determines your willingness-to-pay (WTP) and your willingnessto-accept (WTA). In graphical terms, suppose that you have to find the certainty equivalent given a utility function like that in Figure 6.10. Suppose the
gamble gives you a 50 percent chance of winning A and a 50 percent chance
of winning B.

1. Put a dot on the utility curve right above A. This dot represents the utility
of A (on the y-axis).

2. Put another dot on the utility curve right above B. This dot represents the

utility of B (on the y-axis).

. Draw a straight line between the two dots.

4. Put an X half way down the straight line. The X represents the expected
utility of the gamble (on the y-axis) and the expected value of the gamble
(on the x-axis).

5. Move sideways from the X until you hit the utility curve.

6. Move straight down to the x-axis, and you have the certainty equivalent
(on the x-axis).

w

EU(G)

0 A CE(G) EV(@) B x

| Figure 6.10 | Cate Finding the certainty equivalent

147

===== PAGE 167 =====

148 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

The procedure is illustrated in Figure 6.10. The same procedure can also be
used for gambles where the probabilities are not 50-50. The only thing that
changes is the placement of the X on the straight line in Figure 6.10. If there
is, say, a 3/7 probability of winning A, and a 4/7 probability of winning B,
starting from the left, you put that X four-sevenths of the way up from A to
B. As the probability of winning B increases, the X will move right toward
B and the expected utility of the gamble will approach the utility of B; as
the probability of winning A increases, the X will move left toward A and
the expected utility of the gamble will approach the utility of A. This makes
sense.

Exercise 6.36 Certainty equivalents Demonstrate how to find the certainty
equivalent of the same gamble in the case when the utility function bends
upwards. Confirm that the certainty equivalent is greater than the expected
value.

Remember: when the utility function bends downwards, you are risk averse,
the dashed line falls below the utility function, and the certainty equivalent is
less than the expected value. When the utility function bends upwards, you
are risk prone, the dashed line falls above the utility function, and the certainty equivalent is greater than the expected value. Read this paragraph one
more time to make sure you understand what is going on.

In algebraic terms, you get the certainty equivalent of a gamble by computing the expected utility x of the gamble, and then solving for u(CE) = x.
Thus, you get the answer by computing CE = u~1(x). As long as u(-) is strictly
increasing in money, which it ordinarily will be, the inverse function is well
defined. Consider the gamble in Table 6.8. We know that the expected utility
of this gamble is approximately 1.37. You get the certainty equivalent by solving for u(CE) = 1.37. Given our utility function u(x) = Vx, this implies that
CE = 1.37? = 1.88. Because you are risk averse, the certainty equivalent of the
gamble is lower than the expected value of 2.

Example 6.37 St Petersburg paradox, cont. In Section 6.4 we learned that
for an agent with utility function u(x) = log(x), the expected utility of the
St Petersburg gamble is approximately 0.602. What is the certainty equivalent
of the gamble?

We compute the certainty equivalent by solving the following equation:
log(CE) = 0.602. Thus, the certainty equivalent CE = 10°? ~ 4.00. That is, the
St Petersburg gamble is worth $4.

Exercise 6.38 Compute the certainty equivalent of the gamble in Figure 6.8,
using the utility function u(x) = x.
We end this section with a series of exercises.

Exercise 6.39 Suppose that you are offered the choice between $4 and the
following gamble, G: 1/4 probability of winning $9 and a 3/4 probability of
winning $1.

===== PAGE 168 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

(a) Suppose that your utility function is u(x) = Vx. What is the utility of $4?
What is the utility of G? What is the certainty equivalent? Which would
you choose?

(b) Suppose instead that your utility function is u(x) = x*. What is the utility
of $4? What is the utility of G? What is the certainty equivalent? Which
would you choose?

Exercise 6.40 Suppose that your utility function is u(x) = Vx, and that you
are offered a gamble which allows you to win $4 if you are lucky and $1 if you
are not.

(a) Suppose that the probability of winning $4 is 1/4 and the probability of
winning $1 is 3/4. What is the expected value of this gamble?

(b) Suppose that the probability of winning $4 is still 1/4 and the probability
of winning $1 is 3/4. What is the expected utility of this gamble?

(c) Suppose that the probability of winning $4 is still 1/4 and the probability
of winning $1 is 3/4. What is the certainty equivalent of the gamble; that
is, what is the amount of money X such that you are indifferent between
receiving $X for sure and playing the gamble?

(d) Imagine now that the probability of winning $4 is p and the probability of
winning $1 is (1 — p). If the utility of the gamble equals 3/2, what is p?

Exercise 6.41 Suppose that your utility function is u(x) = Vx, and that you
are offered a gamble which allows you to win $16 if you are lucky and $4 if
you are not.

(a) Suppose that the probability of winning $16 is 1/4 and the probability of
winning $4 is 3/4. What is the expected utility of this gamble?

(b) Suppose that the probability of winning $16 is still 1/4 and the probability
of winning $4 is 3/4. What is the certainty equivalent of the gamble?

(c) Imagine now that the probability of winning $16 is p and the probability
of winning $4 is (1 — p). If the expected utility of the gamble equals 9/4,
what is p?

(d) Are you risk averse or risk prone, given the utility function above?

Exercise 6.42 Lotto 6/49, cont. Compute the certainty equivalent of the
Lotto 6/49 ticket from Exercise 4.28 if u(x) = Vx.

6.6 Discussion

In this chapter, we have explored principles of rational choice under risk and
uncertainty. As pointed out in the introduction to this chapter, according to
the traditional perspective, you face a choice under uncertainty when probabilities are unknown or not even meaningful. In Section 6.2, we explored
several principles of rational choice that may apply under such conditions.
When it is both meaningful and possible to assign probabilities to the relevant states of the world, it becomes possible to compute expectations, which
permits you to apply expected-value and expected-utility theory instead.
The distinction between risk and uncertainty is far from sharp. In real
life, it may not be obvious whether to treat a decision as the one or the other.

149

===== PAGE 169 =====

150 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Consider the regulation of new and unstudied chemical substances. Though
there are necessarily little hard data on such substances, there is always some
probability that they will turn out to be toxic. Some people argue that this
means that policy-makers are facing a choice under uncertainty, that the maximin criterion applies, and that new chemicals should be banned or heavily
regulated until their safety can be established. Others argue that we can and
must assign probabilities to all outcomes, that the probability that new substances will turn out to be truly dangerous is low, and that expected-utility
calculations will favor permitting their use (unless or until their toxicity has
been established). Whether we treat a decision as a choice under uncertainty
or under risk, therefore, can have real consequences. And it is not obvious
how to settle such issues in a non-arbitrary way. (We will return to this topic
under the heading of ambiguous probabilities in Section 7.5.)

One thing to note is that you cannot judge whether a decision was rational
or not by examining the outcome alone. A rational decision, as you know, is a
decision that maximizes expected utility given your beliefs at the time when
you make the decision. Such a decision might lead to adverse outcomes. If
something bad happens as a result of your decision, that does not mean you
acted irrationally: you may just have been unlucky. Sometimes decision theorists use the term “right” to denote the decisions that lead to the best possible
outcome. The fact that good decisions can have bad outcomes means that decisions can be rational but wrong. They can also be irrational but right, as when
you do something completely reckless but see good results anyway; buying a
lottery ticket as a means to get rich and winning truckloads of money might
fall in this category. It goes without saying that we always want to make the
right decision. The problem, of course, is that we do not know ahead of time
which decision is the right one. That is why we aim for the rational decision —
being the one with the greatest expectation of future utility.

Example 6.43 The rationality of having children It is sometimes argued that
certain decisions cannot be made rationally. Philosopher L. A. Paul, for example, has argued that it is impossible to make a rational decision about having a
child, because you cannot know ahead of time what it will be like, for you, to
have a child. But such arguments may confuse the rational with the right. It is
true that you cannot know what the right decision is: you may be very happy
with a child, or you may be miserable. But you never know ahead of time what
the right decision is. Luckily, ignorance is no obstacle to making a rational decision, as “rationality” is understood here. Rationality does not require that you
know what anything is like — only that you choose whatever option maximizes
expected utility given your beliefs at the time you are making the decision.

We will return to the topic of the right and the rational in Section 7.7.

Our study of the theory of choice under risk sheds further light on the economic approach to behavior as understood by Gary Becker, and in particular on what he had in mind when talking about maximizing behavior (see
Section 2.8). Recall (from Section 4.7) that the standard approach does not
assume that people consciously or not perform calculations in their heads: all
talk about maximization (or optimization) is shorthand for the satisfaction of

===== PAGE 170 =====

Chapter 6 Rational Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

preferences. Notice also that this approach does not assume that people are
omniscient, in the sense that they know what state of the world will obtain.
What it does assume is that people assign probabilities to states of the world,
that these probabilities satisfy the axioms of the probability calculus, that people assign utilities to outcomes, and that they choose that alternative which
has the greatest expected utility given the probabilities and utilities.

In the next chapter, we consider some conditions under which these
assumptions appear to fail.

| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 6.44 Deal or No Deal, cont. You are on Deal or No Deal again,
and you are facing three boxes. One of the three contains $1,000,000, one
contains $1000, and one contains $10. Now the dealer offers you $250,000
if you give up your right to open the boxes.

(a) Assuming that you use expected value as your guide in life, would
you choose the sure amount or the right to open the boxes?

(b) Assuming that your utility function u(x) = Vx, and that you use
expected utility as your guide in life, would you choose the sure
amount or the right to open the boxes?

(c) Given the utility function, what is the lowest amount in exchange for
which you would give up your right to open the boxes?

Exercise 6.45 The humiliation show You are on a game show where
people embarrass themselves in the hope of winning a new car. You are
given the choice between pressing a blue button and pressing a red button.
(a) If you press the blue button, any one of two things can happen: with
a probability of 2/3, you wina live frog (utility —1), and with a probability of 1/3 you win a bicycle (utility 11). Compute the expected
utility of pressing the blue button.

If you press the red button, any one of three things can happen: with
a probability of 1/9 you win the car (utility 283), with a probability
of 3/9 you win a decorative painting of a ballerina crying in the sunset (utility 1), and with a probability of 5/9 you end up covered in
green slime (utility —50). Compute the expected utility of pressing
the red button.

(c) What should you do?

Exercise 6.46 Misguided criticism Some critics attribute to neoclassical economists the view that human beings have the ability to compute
solutions to every maximization problem, no matter how complicated,
in their heads and on the fly. For example: “Traditional models of
unbounded rationality and optimization in cognitive science, economics, and animal behavior have tended to view decision-makers as possessing supernatural powers of reason, limitless knowledge, and endless
time.” Explain why this criticism misses the mark.

(b

a

See also Exercise 7.34 on pages 176-177.

151

===== PAGE 171 =====

152 Part3 Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

FURTHER READING

The classic definition and discussion of choice under uncertainty is Luce and Raiffa
(1957, Ch. 13); Rawls (1971) defends Rawls’s theory of justice and Harsanyi (1975)
criticizes it. Helpful introductions to expected-utility theory include Allingham (2002) and
Peterson (2009). The quip about not regretting one’s mistakes appears in Wilde (1998
[1890], p. 34); The Top Five Regrets... is Ware (2012); and Kierkegaard (2000 [1843],
p. 72) despaired of ever avoiding regret. The view that one cannot rationally decide
whether to have children appears in Paul and Healy (2013). The critics are Todd and
Gigerenzer (2000, p. 727).

===== PAGE 172 =====

CHAPTER
Decision-Making under

Risk and Uncertainty =

7.1 Introduction

The theory of expected utility combines the concept of utility from Chapter 2
with the concept of probability from Chapter 4 into an elegant and powerful
theory of choice under risk. The resulting theory, which we explored in the
previous chapter, is widely used. Yet there are situations in which people fail
to conform to the predictions of the theory. In addition, there are situations in
which it is seemingly rational to violate it. In this section we explore some such
situations. We will also continue to explore what behavioral economists do in
the face of systematic deviations from standard theory. To capture the manner in which people actually make decisions under risk, we will make more
assumptions about the value function, which we first came across in Section
3.5, and introduce the probability-weighting function. Both these functions
are essential parts of prospect theory, the most prominent behavioral theory
of choice under risk.

7.2 Framing effects in decision-making under risk

For the next set of problems, suppose that you are a public health official.

Example 7.1 Asian disease problem 1 Imagine that the US is preparing for
the outbreak of an unusual Asian disease, which is expected to kill 600 people.
Two alternative programs to combat the disease have been proposed. Assume
that the exact scientific estimate of the consequences of the programs are as
follows: if Program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved; if Program B is
adopted, there is 1/3 probability that 600 people will be saved, and a 2/3 probability that no one will be saved. Which of the two programs would you favor?

When this problem was first presented to participants, 72 percent chose A
and 28 percent chose B.

Example 7.2 Asian disease problem 2 Imagine that the US is preparing for
the outbreak of an unusual Asian disease, which is expected to kill 600 people.
Two alternative programs to combat the disease have been proposed. Assume
that the exact scientific estimate of the consequences of the programs are as
follows: if Program C is adopted 400 people will die; if Program D is adopted
there is 1/3 probability that nobody will die, and 2/3 probability that 600 people will die. Which of the two programs would you favor?

When this problem was first presented to participants, only 22 percent
chose C and 78 percent chose D.

===== PAGE 173 =====

154 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

The observed response pattern is puzzling. Superficial differences aside,
option A is the same as option C, and option B is the same as option D.

Before discussing what may be going on, let us briefly explore why this
response pattern is hard to reconcile with expected-utility theory. As we
learned in the previous chapter, expected-utility theory does not by itself say
whether you should choose the safe or the risky option: the theory does not
specify what your risk preference should be. But the theory does say that your
choice should reflect your utility function. What matters is whether the point
marked X in Figure 7.1 falls above or below the utility function itself. If the X
falls below the curve, you will choose the safe option. This will occur if your
utility function is concave, like the curve marked 1, and you are risk averse. If
the X falls above the curve, you will choose the gamble. This will occur if your
utility function is convex, like the curve marked 2, and you are risk prone.
If the X falls on the curve, you are indifferent between the two options. This
will occur if your utility function is a straight line, like the dashed line in the
figure. The point is that as long as you act in accordance with expected-utility
theory, you will prefer the safe option no matter how it is described, or you
will prefer the risky option no matter how it is described, or you will be indifferent between the two. Your preference should definitely not depend on how
the options are described.

So how do we account for the behavior exhibited in the study above? The
key is to notice that the behavior can be interpreted in terms of framing. As
you will recall from Section 3.5, framing effects occur when preferences and
behavior are responsive to the manner in which the options are described, and
in particular to whether the options are described in terms of gains or in terms
of losses. Options A and B are both framed in a positive way, in terms of the
lives that might be saved; that is, they are presented in a gain frame. Options
Cand D are both framed in a negative way, in terms of the lives that might be
lost; that is, they are presented in a loss frame.

u(lives)}

Mage icwenme The utility of human lives

===== PAGE 174 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 155

The talk about gains versus losses may remind you of our acquaintance the
value function from prospect theory, which we used to model framing effects in
Section 3.5. There, we learned that unlike the utility function, which ranges over
total endowments, the value function ranges over changes in the endowment.
We already know that many behavioral phenomena can be modeled by assuming a value function that is steeper for losses than for gains. Now we add the
assumption that the value function has different curvatures for losses and for
gains. In the realm of losses, we assume that the curve bends upwards (when
moving from left to right), so that people are risk prone; in the realm of gains,
we assume that the curve bends downwards, so that people are risk averse. In
other words, the value function is convex in the realm of losses and concave
in the realm of gains. This generates an S-shaped value function, as shown in
Figure 7.2.

The curvature of the value function has interesting implications. For
one thing, it entails that the absolute difference between 0(+0) and v(+10)
is greater than than the absolute difference between v(+1000) and v(+1010),
and that this is true for losses as well as for gains. We can establish the result
algebraically, as the next example shows.

Example 7.3 Curvatures An S-shaped value function » (-) can be defined by
an expression that has two components: one corresponding to the realm of
gains and one corresponding to the realm of losses. For example:

ox) = Vxi2 for gains (x = 0)
—2V\x| for losses (x < 0)

Using this equation, the value of +0 is v(+0) = 0 while the value of +10 is
v(+10) = V10/2 = V5 ~ 2.24. The difference is v(+10) — 0(+0) ~ 2.24 - 0
2.24. Meanwhile, the value of +1000 is v(-+1000) = V+1000/2 ~ 22.36 while the
value of +1010 is v( +1010) = V+1010/2 ~ 22.47. The difference is only v( +1010)
— v(1000) = 22.47 — 22.36 = 0.11. The difference between v(+0) and v(+10) is
much greater than than the difference between 0(+1000) and (+1010).

v(x)

realm of losses

realm of gains

atccweras The value function

===== PAGE 175 =====

156 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Because we are dealing with positive numbers throughout, we are in the
realm of gains, which means that we are using the upper half of the equation.
In the next exercise you will be using the lower half of the equation, since you
will be dealing with negative numbers and the realm of losses. By the way, |x| is
the absolute value of x: that is, x with the minus sign removed (if there is one).

Exercise 7.4 Curvatures, cont. Given the same value function, which is
greater: the absolute difference between v(+0) and v(—10) or the absolute difference between v(—1000) and v(—1010)?

Exercise 7.5 Jacket/calculator problem, again Consider again the classic
jacket/calculator example from Section 3.2. Recall that many people were
willing to make the drive when they could save $5 on a $15 calculator but not
when they could save $5 on a $125 calculator. Using the same value function,
show that the difference between v(+10) and v(+15) is much greater than
than the difference between v(+120) and (+125).

The exercise shows that an S-shaped value function can in fact account for the
observed behavior in the jacket/calculator case.

We are now in a position to return to the Asian disease problem. The
assumption that the value function is convex in the realm of losses and concave in the realm of gains helps account for the behavior of people facing
this problem. The essential insight is that participants presented with the gain
frame (as in Example 7.1) take their reference point to be the case in which
no lives are saved (and 600 lost); participants presented with the loss frame
(as in Example 7.2) take their reference point to be the case in which no lives
are lost (and 600 saved). We can capture this in one graph by using two value
functions to represent the fact that the two groups of participants use different
outcomes as their reference point. In Figure 7.3, the concave value function on
the top left belongs to people in the gain frame, while the convex value function on the bottom right belongs to people in the loss frame. As you can tell

vilives}

| Figure 7.3 | The value of human lives

===== PAGE 176 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 157

from the figure, people in the gain frame will prefer A to B, but people in the
loss frame will prefer D to C.

Exercise 7.6 The ostrich farm Jen and Joe have an ostrich farm. They have just
learned that the farm has been struck by an unusual virus. According to their vet,
if they do nothing only 200 of the 600 animals will live. However, the vet offers an
experimental drug. If this drug is used, the vet says there is a 2/3 chance that all
animals will die, but a 1/3 chance that all animals will live. Jen says: “The drug
isn’t worth it. It’s better to save 200 animals for sure than risk saving none.” Joe
says: “I think we should use the drug. Even if it’s risky, that’s the only way we
have a chance of losing no animals at all. Taking the risk is better than losing 400
animals for sure.” Draw a graph explaining how the two can come to such different realizations even though they have value functions with the same shape.

The following example is another nice illustration of the phenomenon.

Example 7.7 Prospect evaluation Consider the following two problems:

(a) In addition to whatever you own, you have been given $1000. You are
now asked to choose between (A) a 50 percent chance of winning $1000
and (B) winning $500 for sure.

(b) In addition to whatever you own, you have been given $2000. You are
now asked to choose between (C) a 50 percent chance of losing $1000 and
(D) losing $500 for sure.

In terms of final outcomes, (A) is obviously equivalent to (C) and (B) to

(D). Yet 84 percent of participants chose B in the first problem, and 69 percent

chose C in the second.

The difference between Example 7.7(a) and (b) is that in the former, outcomes
are described in a gain frame, whereas in the latter, they are described in a loss
frame. Consequently, in (a) the gamble represents an opportunity to win the
big prize, whereas in (b) the gamble represents an opportunity to prevent a
loss. To show how the observed response pattern might emerge we can analyze the problem algebraically.

Exercise 7.8 Prospect evaluation, cont. This exercise refers to Example 7.7

above. Suppose that your value function v(-) is defined by: o(x) = Vx/2 for

gains (x = 0) and v(x) = —2-V\x] for losses(x < 0)

(a) Draw the curve for values between —4 and +4. Confirm that it is concave
in the domain of gains and convex in the domain of losses.

(b) Assuming that you have integrated the $1000 into your endowment, what
is the value of (A)?

(c) Assuming that you have integrated the $1000 into your endowment, what
is the value of (B)?

(d) Assuming that you have integrated the $2000 into your endowment, what
is the value of (C)?

(e) Assuming that you have integrated the $2000 into your endowment, what
is the value of (D)?

Notice how (B) turns out to be better than (A), but (C) better than (D).

===== PAGE 177 =====

158 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

The idea that people are risk averse in the domain of gains but risk prone in
the domain of losses helps explain a range of phenomena. It can explain why
some people are unable to stop gambling: once they find themselves in the red —
which they will, soon enough, when playing games like roulette — they enter
the domain of losses, where they are even more risk prone than they used to be.
There is evidence that people betting on horses, etc., are more willing to bet on
long shots at the end of the betting day. This phenomenon is often accounted
for by saying that people who have already suffered losses are more prone to
tisk-seeking behavior. Analogously, the idea can explain why politicians continue to pursue failed projects and generals continue to fight losing wars: as
initial efforts fail, the responsible parties enter the domain of losses, in which
they are willing to bet on increasingly long shots and therefore take increasingly desperate measures. Somewhat paradoxically, then, this analysis suggests
that people, countries, and corporations can be expected to be most aggressive
when they are weakest — not when they are strongest, as you might think.

Here are some more exercises.

Exercise 7.9 A person’s value function is o(x) = Vx/2 for gains and v(x) =

—2V/\x] for losses. The person is facing the choice between a sure $2 and a

50-50 gamble that pays $4 if she wins and $0 if she loses.

(a) Show algebraically that this person is loss averse, in the sense that she
suffers more when she loses $4 than she benefits when she receives $4.

(b) If she takes the worst possible outcome ($0) as her reference point, what is
the value of the sure amount and the gamble? Which would she prefer?

(c) If she takes the best possible outcome ($4) as her reference point, what is
the value of the sure amount and the gamble? Which would she prefer?

Exercise 7.10 Another person with the same value function is facing the

choice between a sure $2 and a 50-50 gamble that pays $5 if he wins and $1 if

he loses.

(a) If he takes the worst possible outcome as his reference point, what is the
value of the sure amount and the gamble? Which would he prefer?

(b) If he takes the best possible outcome as his reference point, what is the
value of the sure amount and the gamble? Which would he prefer?

Exercise 7.11 Relative income It is well known that poor people, who can least
afford to play the lottery, are most likely to do so. In a 2008 study, researchers
wanted to know whether manipulating people’s perceptions of their income can
affect their demand for lottery tickets. Half of the participants were made to feel
rich by answering a question about their yearly income on a scale from “<$10k,”
“$10k-$20k,” and so on, to “>$60k.” The other half were made to feel poor by
answering the same question ona scale from “<$100k,” “$100k—$200k,” and so on,
to “>$1M.” At the conclusion of the study, participants who were made to feel relatively poor were more likely to choose lottery tickets than cash as a reward for their
participation. Are these findings consistent with the analysis in this section or not?

Framing effects should not be confused with wealth effects, which occur when
people’s risk aversion changes when they go from being poor to being rich (or

===== PAGE 178 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 159

the other way around), and which can be represented using a single utility function. It would be normal, for instance, if your curve got flatter and flatter as your
wealth increased, thereby making you less risk averse. Not all the data can be
easily accommodated in this framework, however; much of it is better explained
by a value function that is convex in the realm of losses and concave in the realm
of gains. In the following section, we discuss other applications of these ideas.

7.3 Bundling and mental accounting

The fact that the value function is concave in the domain of gains and convex
in the domain of losses has other interesting implications, one being that it
matters how outcomes are bundled (see Section 3.5). Suppose that you buy
two lottery tickets at a charity event, and that you win $25 on the first and $50
on the second. There are different ways to think of what happened at the event
(see Figure 7.4). You can integrate the outcomes, and tell yourself that you
just won $75, which in value terms would translate into v(+75). Or you can
segregate the outcomes and tell yourself that you first won $25 and then won.
$50, which in value terms would translate into o(+25) + 0(+50). Bundling can.
be seen as an instance of framing: at stake is whether you frame the change as
one larger gain or as two smaller gains.

According to the standard view, bundling should not matter. The utility
function ranges over total endowments, and no matter how you describe the
various outcomes you end up with an additional $75 dollars in your pocket.

clicwecm Integration vs. segregation of gains. Illustration by Cody Taylor

===== PAGE 179 =====

160 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

In utility terms, then, if you start off at u(w), you will end up at u(w + 25 + 50)
= u(w + 75) either way.

According to prospect theory, however, bundling matters. Suppose that
you start off with wealth w and that you take the status quo as your reference
point. When the two gains are integrated, the value of winning $75 can be characterized as in Figure 7.5(a). However, when the two gains are segregated, the
situation looks different. This is so because you have the time to adjust your
reference point before assessing the value of the second gain. When the two
gains are segregated, your picture will look more as in Figure 7.5(b), where the
dashed line represents your value function relative to the new reference point.
It should be clear just from looking at these two figures that the value of a $25
gain plus the value of a $50 gain is greater than the value of a $75 gain; that is,
(+25) + v(+50) > v(+75). This result follows from the value function being

(a) Integration

(b} Segregation

Megcllcwesm Evaluation of two gains

===== PAGE 180 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 161

concave in the domain of gains. The upshot is that people value two gains
more when they are segregated than when they are integrated.

An analogy might help. If you are in a totally dark room and you turn
on a light bulb, there is a huge difference: you can see, which is wonderful if you would rather not be in the dark. If you add a second light bulb
of the same wattage, you will experience a small change in brightness, but
the difference is not going to be that large. It is certainly not going to be as
large as going from zero light bulbs to one: going from one to two makes
a much smaller difference than going from zero to one. Something similar
occurs with money. Winning a small amount is good. Winning ten times that
amount is much better, obviously, but it is not ten times as good. As a result,
ten small gains are experienced as more impressive than the one gain that is
ten times as large.

The fact that gains are valued more when segregated helps explain a variety of phenomena. For example, it explains why people do not put all their
Christmas presents in one big box, even though that would save them time
and money on wrapping: the practice of wrapping each present separately
encourages the recipient to segregate the gains. The analysis also suggests that
it is even better to give separate presents on separate nights, as on Hanukkah,
rather than delivering all presents on Christmas, since this would do even
more to encourage recipients to separate the gains. The analysis indicates that
it is better to give people multiple small presents over the course of the year
than to give them one big present once a year. While it is in good taste to give
your spouse a present on your anniversary, you may wish to save some of
the money and buy smaller presents during the rest of the year too. Similarly,
segregation explains why fancy meals are served up dish-by-dish, rather than
all at one time: chances are the eater will enjoy it more that way. In addition, the effect of segregating gains explains why workers receive end-of-year
bonuses: receiving a $50k salary plus a $5k bonus encourages the segregation
of gains in a manner that receiving a $55k salary does not. Finally, the value
of segregated gains explains why people on daytime television try to sell pots
and pans by offering to throw in lids, knives, cutting boards, and so on, rather
than simply offering a basket consisting of all these goods. Again, this practice
encourages the segregation of the gains.

Exercise 7.12 Evaluation of gains Yesterday, you had a decent day: you
first received a $48 tax refund, and then an old friend repaid a $27 loan you
had forgotten about. Suppose that your value function v(-) is defined by:
v(x) = Vx/3. for gains (x = 0) and o(x) = —3V/|x] for losses(x < 0)

(a) If you integrate the two gains, what is the total value?

(b) If you segregate the two gains, what is the total value?

(c) From the point of view of value, is it better to integrate or to segregate?

Meanwhile, people are less dissatisfied when multiple losses are integrated
than when they are segregated. By constructing graphs like those in Figure 7.5,
you can confirm that, from the point of view of value, a $25 loss plus an additional $50 loss is worse than a $75 loss; that is, v(—25) + v(—50) < v(—75).

===== PAGE 181 =====

162 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

This result follows from the fact that the value function is convex in the domain
of losses. Notice that if you do purchase the pots and pans from daytime television, and get all the other stuff in the bargain, your credit card is likely to be
charged only once, meaning that costs are integrated. This is no coincidence:
by encouraging customers to integrate the losses while segregating the gains,
marketers take maximum advantage of these effects.

Example 7.13 Stalin Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin is alleged to have said:
“The death of one man is a tragedy; the death of millions is a statistic.” This line
captures an important insight about integration: a million deaths is nowhere
near as bad, from our subjective point of view, as a million times one death.

The fact that people experience less dissatisfaction when losses are integrated
helps explain a variety of phenomena. It explains why sellers of cars, homes,
and other pricey goods often try to sell expensive add-ons. Although you may
never pay $1000 for a car radio, when it is bundled with a $25,999 car it may
not sound like very much: for reasons explored in the previous section, a loss
of $26,999 might not seem that much worse than a loss of $25,999. By contrast,
since they are entirely different quantities, you might find it easy to segregate
the car from the radio, which would further encourage you to accept the offer.
Similarly, the wedding industry makes good use of integration by adding
options that individually do not seem very expensive relative to what the hosts
are already spending, but which jointly can cause major financial distress. “If
you're spending $3000 on a dress, does it matter if you spend an additional $10
on each invitation?” The effects of integrating losses can also explain why so
many people prefer to use credit cards rather than paying cash. When you use
a credit card, though the monthly bill might be alarming, it only arrives once
a month, thereby encouraging you to integrate the losses. By contrast, the satisfaction of receiving the things you buy is distributed throughout the month,
thereby encouraging the segregation of gains.

Exercise 7.14 The opposite arrangement Suppose that the opposite were
true: whenever you purchase something, you have to pay cash on the spot,
but your purchases are not delivered until the end of the month in a giant box
containing everything you bought in the last four weeks.

(a) Would you make more or fewer purchases this way?

(b) Use the language of integration and segregation to explain why.

Exercise 7.15 Air fares If you are old enough, you may remember the good
old days when all sorts of conveniences were included in the price of an airline ticket. Under pressure to reduce the sticker price of their tickets, airlines
have started charging less for the tickets themselves, but made it a habit to
recover the losses by charging fees for everything from checked luggage to
food and drink and early boarding. Perhaps they sell more tickets this way,
but the effort is likely to sharply reduce customer satisfaction. Why?

This analysis might also explain why people hold on to cars even though taking cabs may be less expensive in the long run. The actual cost of owning a car

===== PAGE 182 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 163

for a month (including maintenance, car payments, insurance payments, gasoline, car washes, etc.) is so high that for many people it would make financial
sense to sell the car and just hail cabs. The reason why people hesitate to do
this (outside the major cities) may be related to the fact that car payments are
made monthly or weekly, whereas taxi payments are made at the conclusion
of every ride. Consequently, taxi companies could encourage more business
by allowing people to run a tab and to pay it off once a month. The analysis
can also explain why people prefer to pay a flat monthly fee for cell phone
services, internet connections, and gym memberships: doing so permits them
to integrate what would otherwise be many separate losses. The chances are
you would not dream of joining a gym that charged you by the mile you ran
on the treadmill. In part, this is for incentive-compatibility reasons: you do
not want to join a gym that gives you a disincentive to exercise. But, in part,
this may be because you wish to integrate the losses associated with your gym
membership.

Exercise 7.16 Evaluation of losses Yesterday, you had a terrible day: you
got a $144 speeding ticket on your way to the opera, and then had to pay $25
for a ticket you thought would be free. Suppose your value function remains
that of Exercise 7.12.

(a) If you integrate the two losses, what is the total value?

(b) If you segregate the two losses, what is the total value?

(c) From the point of view of value, is it better to integrate or to segregate?

Example 7.17 Online booksellers If you look this book up at a large online
tetailer, you may see a little advertisement saying something like: “This book
is frequently bought with Kahneman’s Thinking, Fast and Slow. Buy both for
twice the price!” Presumably the message contains no new information: you
already knew that you could get more books for more money. How is this
message supposed to work?

Related phenomena occur when experiencing a large loss in combination with
a small gain or a small gain in combination with a large loss. People gain more
value when they integrate a small loss with a large gain. That way, the pain
of the loss is not felt so intensely. This phenomenon is referred to as cancellation. Suppose that you win a million dollars, but have to pay a 10 percent tax
on your winnings. The theory suggests that you will derive more value from.
telling yourself that you won $900,000 than by telling yourself that you won
$1,000,000 and then lost $100,000.

Exercise 7.18 The pain of paying taxes The previous paragraph suggests

that how you feel about paying your taxes will depend on whether you inte-

grate that cost with the money you made or not.

(a) If you are a politician known for favoring high taxes, should you encourage voters to integrate or segregate? How should you shape your message?

(b) If youare a politician known for favoring low taxes, should you encourage
voters to integrate or segregate? How should you shape your message?

===== PAGE 183 =====

164 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Meanwhile, people gain more value when they segregate a large loss from a
small gain. The small gain is often described as a silver lining. This analysis
explains why some cars, apartments, and other big-ticket items sometimes
come with cash-back offers. A customer may be more likely to buy a car with
a $27k price tag and a $1k cash-back offer than to buy the very same car with
a $26k price tag; the $1k gain, when segregated, helps offset the pain associated with the $27k loss. The analysis also explains why credit-card companies frequently offer reward points for spending money on the card. Though
the value of the reward points is small relative to monthly fees and charges,
the company hopes that you will segregate and that the reward points therefore will serve to offset the larger loss. Finally, silver-lining phenomena may
explain why rejection letters frequently include lines about how impressed
the committee was with your submission or job application. The hope is that
disingenuous flattery, when segregated, will to some extent offset the much
greater perceived loss of the publication or job.

Exercise 7.19 Silver linings For this question, suppose your value function
is v(x) = Vx/2 for gains and v(x) = —2V/\z] for losses. Last night, you lost $9
in a bet. There was a silver lining, though: on your way home, you found $2
lying on the sidewalk.

(a) If you integrate the loss and the gain, what is the total value?

(b) If you segregate the loss and the gain, what is the total value?

(c) From the point of view of value, is it better to integrate or to segregate?

When do people integrate and when do they segregate? One possibility that
might come to mind is that people bundle outcomes so as to maximize the
amount of value that they experience. This is called the hedonic-editing
hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, people will (1) segregate gains, (2)
integrate losses, (3) cancel a small loss against a large gain, and (4) segregate
a small gain from a large loss. Unfortunately, data suggest that the hypothesis
is not in general true. In particular, it seems, people frequently fail to integrate
subsequent losses. If you think about it, the failure of the hedonic-editing
hypothesis is unsurprising in light of the fact that we need parents, therapists,
boyfriends, and girlfriends to remind us of how to think about things in order
not to be needlessly unhappy.

Bundling may be driven in part by mental accounting: people’s tendency, in their minds, to divide money into separate categories. Mental
accounting can be helpful in that it may stop you from overspending on
any one category. But mental accounting can itself cause people to overconsume or underconsume particular kinds of goods: if the mental “entertainment account” is seen as having money left in it, but the mental “clothing
account” is seen as overdrawn, people might spend more on entertainment
even though they would maximize utility by buying clothes. This kind of
behavior violates fungibility: the idea that money has no labels. Mental
accounting might also affect the manner in which goods are bundled. For
example, coding goods as belonging to the same category is likely to encourage integration, whereas coding goods as belonging to separate categories is
likely to encourage segregation.

===== PAGE 184 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 165

7.4 The Allais problem and the sure-thing principle

The following decision problem is called the Allais problem.

Example 7.20 Allais problem Suppose that you face the following options,
and that you must choose first between (1a) and (Ib), and second between (2a)
and (2b). What would you choose?

(1a) $1 million for sure

(1b) An 89% chance of $1 million & a 10% chance of $5 million

(2a) An 11% chance of $1 million

(2b) A 10% chance of $5 million

A common response pattern here is (1a) and (2b). For the first pair, people
may reason as follows: “Sure, $5 million is better than $1 million, but if I chose
(1b) there would be some chance of winning nothing, and if that happened to
me I would definitely regret not choosing the million dollars. So I'll go with
(la).” That is, a choice of (1a) over (1b) might be driven by regret aversion (see
Section 6.2). For the second pair, people may reason in this way: “Certainly,
an 11 percent chance of winning is better than a 10 percent chance of winning,
but that difference is fairly small; meanwhile, 5 million dollars is a lot better
than 1 million dollars, so I'll go with (2b).” For the second pair, the potential
for regret is much less salient.

Unfortunately, this response pattern is inconsistent with expected-utility
theory. To see this, consider what it means to prefer (1a) to (1b). It means that
the expected utility of the former must be greater than the expected utility of
the latter. Thus:

u(1M) > .89u(1M) + .10*u(5M) (7.1)

Preferring (2b) to (2a) means that the expected utility of the former must
exceed the expected utility of the latter. Hence:

10*u(5M) > 11 *u(1M) (7.2)

But because .11 * u(1M) = (1 — .89) * u(1M) = u(1M) — .89 * u(1M), (7.2) is
equivalent to

.10*u(5M) > u(1M) — .89*u(1M) (7.3)
Rearranging the terms in (7.3), we get:
.89 *u(1M) + .10* u(5M) > u(1M) (7.4)

But (7.4) contradicts (7.1). So the choice pattern that we are analyzing is in fact
inconsistent with expected-utility theory.

There is another way of seeing why the choice pattern is inconsistent with
expected-utility theory. Suppose that you spin a roulette wheel with 100 slots:
89 black, 10 red, and 1 white. This permits us to represent the four options in
table form, as in Table 7.1.

===== PAGE 185 =====

166 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Table 7.1 The Allais problem

Black (89%) Red (10%) White (1%)

(la) $1M $1M $1M
(1b) $1M $5M $0
(2a) $0

(2b) $0

Let us begin by considering the first decision problem: that between (la) and
(1b). The table reveals that when black occurs, it does not matter what you
choose; you will get a million dollars either way. In this sense, the million
dollars if black occurs is a sure thing. The expression .89 * u(1M) appears in
the calculation of the expected utility of (1a), of course, but because it also
appears in the calculation of the expected utility of (1b), it should not affect
the decision. Let us now consider the second decision problem. Again, the
table reveals that when black occurs, you receive nothing no matter what you
choose. So again, the $0 is a sure thing and should not affect the relative desirability of (2a) and (2b). Thus, what happens in the column marked “Black”
should not affect your choices at all. Instead, your choices will be determined
by what happens in the other two columns. But once you ignore the column
marked “Black,” (1a) is identical to (2a) and (1b) is identical to (2b): just compare the two shaded areas in Table 7.1. So if you strictly prefer (1a), you are
rationally compelled to choose (2a); if you strictly prefer (1b), you are rationally compelled to choose (2b).

The sure-thing principle says that your decisions should not be influenced
by sure things. As this discussion indicates, it is implicit in expected-utility
theory. The next exercise may help make the principle clearer.

Exercise 7.21 Sure-thing principle

(a) Suppose that you face the options in Table 7.2(a). Which state of the world
does the sure-thing principle tell you to ignore?

(b) Suppose that you face the options in Table 7.2(b). What does the surething principle tell you about this decision problem?

Exercise 7.22 Sure-thing principle, cont. Suppose that you face the options
in Table 7.2(c) and that you must choose first between (1a) and (1b), and second between (2a) and (2b). What choice pattern is ruled out by the sure-thing
principle?

As a normative principle, the sure-thing principle has its appeal, but it is
not uncontroversial. Some people argue that violations of the sure-thing
principle can be perfectly rational, and that there consequently is something
wrong with expected-utility theory as a normative standard. Others insist
that the sure-thing principle is a normatively correct principle. What is fairly
clear, though, is that it is false as a description of actual behavior; people
seem to violate it regularly and predictably. (We will return to this topic in
the next section.)

===== PAGE 186 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 167

One way to describe the Allais paradox is to say that people overweight
outcomes that are certain, in the sense that they occur with a 100 percent probability. This tendency has been called the certainty effect. As suggested above,
the certainty effect might result from regret aversion: whenever you forego a
certain option for a risky one, there is some chance that you will experience
regret. Thus, a desire to minimize anticipated regret would lead to the rejection of the option that is not certain.

Table 7.2 Sure-thing principle

A B Cc P Q R S
(1) 2 1 4 (1) 3 2 4
2) 3 1 3 (2) 3 1 4 2
(a) (b)
x Y Z

(la) 80 100 40
(lb) 40 100 80
(2a) 40 0 80
(2b) 80 0 40

(©)

The certainty effect is apparent in slightly different kinds of context as well, as
the following example shows.

Example 7.23 Certainty effect Which of the following options do you prefer: (A) a sure win of $30; (B) an 80 percent chance to win $45? Which of the
following options do you prefer: (C) a 25 percent chance to win $30; (D) a 20
percent chance to win $45?

In this study, 78 percent of respondents favored A over B, yet 58 percent
favored D over C.

The observed behavior pattern is an instance of the certainty effect, since a
reduction from 100 percent to 25 percent makes a bigger difference to people
than a reduction from 80 percent to 20 percent.

Exercise 7.24 Certainty effect, cont. Show that it is a violation of expected-utility theory to choose (A) over (B) and (D) over (C) in Example 7.23. Notice that (C)
and (D) can be obtained from (A) and (B) by dividing the probabilities by four.

Does the certainty effect appear in the real world? It might. In a study of 72 physicians attending a meeting of the California Medical Association, physicians were
asked which treatment they would favor for a patient with a tumor, given the
choice between a radical treatment such as extensive surgery (options A and C),
which involves a greater chance of imminent death, and a moderate treatment such.
as radiation (options B and D). They were presented with the following options:

===== PAGE 187 =====

168 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

A 80 percent chance of long life

(20 percent chance of imminent death)
B 100 percent probability of short life

(0 percent chance of imminent death)
C 20 percent chance of long life

(80 percent chance of imminent death)
D_ 25 percent chance of short life

(75 percent chance of imminent death).

The certainty effect was plainly visible: in violation of expected-utility theory,
65 percent favored B over A, yet 68 percent favored C over D. The fact that
medical doctors exhibit the same behavior patterns as other people should
not surprise us. It might be helpful to know this, whether or not you are a
medical doctor.

7.5 The Ellsberg problem and ambiguity aversion

The following decision problem is referred to as the Ellsberg problem. The
problem is due to Daniel Ellsberg, a US military analyst otherwise famous for
releasing the so-called Pentagon Papers. Ellsberg was the subject of the 2009
documentary The Most Dangerous Man in America.

Example 7.25 Ellsberg problem Suppose that Dan shows you an urn witha
total of 90 balls in it. There are three kinds of ball: red, black, and yellow. You
know (from a trustworthy authority) that 30 are red, but you do not know
how many of the remaining 60 are black and how many are yellow: there
could be anywhere from 0 black and 60 yellow to 60 black and 0 yellow. The
composition of the urn is illustrated by Table 7.3.

Table 7.3 Dan’s urn

Red Black Yellow
Number of balls in urn 30 60

Dan invites you to randomly draw a ball from the urn. He gives you the choice
between two different gambles: (I) $100 if the ball is red, and (II) $100 dollars if
the ball is black. Which one would you choose? Next, Dan gives you a choice
between the following two gambles: (III) $100 if the ball is red or yellow, and
(IV) $100 if the ball is black or yellow. Which one would you choose?

When faced with the Ellsberg problem, many people will choose (I) rather
than (Il), apparently because they know that the chances of winning are 1/3; if
they choose the other option the chances of winning could be anywhere from
0 to 2/3. Meanwhile, many people will choose (IV) rather than (III), apparently because they know the chances of winning are 2/3; if they choose the
other option the chances of winning could be anywhere from 1/3 to 1.

===== PAGE 188 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 169

However, and perhaps unfortunately, the choice of (1) from the first pair of
options and (IV) from the second pair violates the sure-thing principle introduced in the previous section. The violation may be clearer if we represent the
problem as in Table 7.4, which shows the payoffs for all four gambles and the
three different outcomes.

As the table shows, what happens when a yellow ball is drawn does not
depend on your choices. Whether you choose (I) or (II) from the first pair,
when a yellow ball is drawn you will get nothing either way. The $0 when a
yellow ball is drawn is a sure thing. Whether you choose (III) or (IV) from the
second pair, when a yellow ball is drawn you will get $100 either way. Again,
the $100 is a sure thing. Thus, the sure-thing principle says that your choices
should not depend on what happens when you draw a yellow ball. That is,
your choice should not depend on what is going on in the last column of
Table 7.4. Your choice must reflect your evaluation of what is going on in the
two columns to the left only. Ignoring the column marked “Yellow,” however,
you will see that (I) and (III) are identical, as are (II) and (IV): just compare
the two shaded areas in the table. Hence, unless you are indifferent, you must
either choose (I) and (III) or (II) and (IV).

Table 7.4 The Ellsberg problem

Red (R) Black (B) Yellow (Y)

I 100 0 0
II 0 100 0
I 100
IV 100

There is another way of showing how the choice pattern (I) and (IV) is
inconsistent with expected-utility theory. A strict preference for (I) over (I)
entails that EU(I) > EU(ID, which means that:

Pr(R) * u(100) + Pr(B)*u(0) + Pr(Y)*u(0) >
Pr(R) # u(0) + Pr(B) * u(100) + Pr(y)* u(0)
Meanwhile, a strict preference for (IV) over (III) entails that EU(IV) > EU(ID,
which means that:
Pr(R) *u(0) + Pr(B) *u(100) + Pr(Y) *u(100) >
Pr(R) *u(100) + Pr(B) *u(0) + Pr(Y) * 4(100)
Let us assume that (0) = 0 and that (100) = 1, which is only to say that you
prefer $100 over nothing. If so, these two expressions imply that the following
two conditions must simultaneously be satisfied:
Pr(R) > Pr(B)
Pr(B) > Pr(R)

But that is obviously impossible. So again, the choice pattern we have been
talking about is inconsistent with expected-utility theory.

===== PAGE 189 =====

170 ~Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

How do we explain the fact that people exhibit this inconsistency? The
two rejected options — (ID and (III) —- have something in common, namely, that
the exact probability of winning is unclear. We say that these probabilities are
ambiguous. By contrast, the favored options — (I) and (IV) - are not associated with ambiguous probabilities. The observed choices seem to reflect an
unwillingness to take on gambles with ambiguous probabilities. We refer to
this phenomenon as ambiguity aversion. Some people have a greater tolerance for ambiguity than others, but any aversion to ambiguity is a violation of
expected-utility theory. Insofar as people are in fact ambiguity averse, which
they seem to be, expected-utility theory fails to capture their behavior. And
insofar as it is rationally permissible to take ambiguity into account when
making decisions, expected-utility theory does not capture the manner in
which people should make decisions.

Exercise 7.26 The coins Suppose that you have the opportunity to bet on the
outcome of a coin toss. If the coin comes up heads, you win; if it comes up tails,
you lose. Suppose also that you are ambiguity averse. Would you rather bet on
a fair coin (with equal probabilities of coming up heads and tails) or on a loaded
coin with unknown, unequal probabilities of coming up heads and tails?

Exercise 7.27 Tennis You have been invited to bet on one of three tennis
games. In game 1, two extraordinarily good tennis players are up against each
other. In game 2, two extraordinarily poor tennis players are up against each
other. In game 3, one very good and one very bad player are up against each
other, but you do not know which is good and which is bad. As a result, as far
as you are concerned, the probability that any given player will win is 50 percent. Suppose that you are ambiguity averse. Which of the three games would
you be least likely to bet on? Why?

There is no principled reason why people cannot be ambiguity prone rather
than ambiguity averse. In fact, evidence suggests that people’s behavior in
the face of ambiguous probabilities depends on the context. According to the
competence hypothesis, for example, people are less averse to ambiguity in
contexts where they consider themselves particularly knowledgeable. Thus,
a football fan may be ambiguity averse in the Ellsberg case (where outcomes
are completely random) but ambiguity prone when predicting the outcomes
of football games (where he or she feels like an expert).

Exercise 7.28 Nevada’s boom and bust Las Vegas entrepreneur Andrew
Donner does not gamble at the casinos. Instead, he invests in real estate in the
city’s downtown. Interviewed on Marketplace, Donner said: “Well, you know
casinos, you somewhat know the odds, and I think there’s something beautiful about being somewhat ignorant of your odds out in the business marketplace. You keep working and hopefully you win more than you lose.”

(a) Is Donner ambiguity averse or ambiguity prone?

(b) Are his attitudes consistent with the competence hypothesis or not?

Even so, the Ellsberg paradox and ambiguity aversion have potentially
vast implications. What they suggest is that people do not in general assign

===== PAGE 190 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 171

probabilities satisfying the axioms of the probability calculus to events with
ambiguous probabilities. And in the real world, ambiguous probabilities are
common. The probability of bankruptcies, oil spills, and nuclear meltdowns
can be estimated, but, outside games of chance, some ambiguity almost
always remains. Thus, it is highly likely that people’s choices do reflect the fact
that people are ambiguity averse — or prone, as the case may be. And perhaps
choices should reflect the ambiguity of the probabilities too.

Example 7.29 Known knowns In a 2002 press briefing, American Defense
Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said: “[As] we know, there are known knowns;
there are things we know we know. We also know there are known unknowns;
that is to say we know there are some things we do not know. But there are also
unknown unknowns -— the ones we don’t know we don’t know.” Rumsfeld
was roundly satirized following the briefing, but the distinctions he was
trying to draw may be very important.

7.6 Probability weighting

The idea that the value function is concave in the domain of gains and convex
in the domain of losses helps us to analyze a wide range of behaviors, as we
saw in Sections 7.2 and 7.3. Yet there are widely observed behavior patterns
that cannot be accommodated within this framework. Consider the fact that
some people simultaneously gamble and purchase insurance. This is paradoxical from the point of view of expected-utility theory. If people are risk
averse, they should buy insurance but not gamble; if they are risk prone, they
should gamble but not buy insurance; and if they are risk neutral, they should
do neither. It is theoretically possible that people have inverted-S-shaped utility functions, like the dashed line in Figure 6.9 on page 146, and that the inflection point (marked x* in the figure) just happens to correspond to their present
endowment. Yet it seems too much like a coincidence that this should be true
for so many people.

Simultaneous gambling and insurance shopping are equally paradoxical from the point of view of the theory we have studied in this chapter
so far. The fact that people are willing to accept a gamble in which they
may win a large sum of money suggests that they are risk prone in the
domain of gains, while the fact that they are willing to reject a gamble in
which they may lose their house suggests that they are risk averse in the
domain of losses. This would entail that their value function is convex in
the domain of gains and concave in the domain of losses, which is the very
opposite of what we have assumed to date. The only way to accommodate
this behavior pattern within the framework above is to assume that people
take the state when they win the grand prize as their reference point when
gambling, and the state in which they lose things as their reference point
when buying insurance. This seems artificial, however, in light of the other
evidence that people otherwise frequently take their endowment as their
reference point.

===== PAGE 191 =====

172 «Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Another way to understand the observed behavior pattern is to think of
those who gamble as well as those who buy insurance as prone to paying too
much attention to unlikely events. The more weight you put on the probability of winning the lottery, the more likely you will be to gamble. And the more
weight you put on the probability of losing your house, car, life, and limb, the
more likely you will be to purchase insurance. This insight suggests a more
systematic approach to explaining how people can simultaneously buy lottery
tickets and insurance.

Prospect theory incorporates this kind of behavior by introducing the
notion of probability weighting. We know from Definition 6.21 on page 142
that expected-utility theory says that the agent maximizes an expression of the
following form:

EU(A,) = Pr(S,)*u(C,)+ Pr(S,)*u(C,) + ... + Pr(S.)*u(C,)

By contrast, prospect theory says that the agent maximizes an expression in
which the value function v(-) is substituted for the utility function u(-), and in
which probabilities are weighted by a probability-weighting function 7(-).

Definition 7.30 Value Given a decision problem as in Table 6.4 on page 136, the
value (or weighted value) V (A,) of an act A, is given by:

V(A) = al Pr(S,)]*0(C,) + wIPr(S,)]#0(C,) + ... + a[Pr(S,)]#0(C,)
= SalPr(s)}0C).

jel

The probability-weighting function a(-) assigns weights, from zero to one
inclusive, to probabilities. It is assumed that 7(0) = 0 and that 7(1) = 1.
But, as shown in Figure 7.6, for values strictly between zero and one, the
curve does not coincide with the 45-degree line. For low probabilities, it
is assumed that (x) > x, and for moderate and high probabilities, that
a(x) <x.

The probability-weighting function can help resolve the paradox that
some people simultaneously buy lottery tickets and insurance policies.
A well-informed expected-utility maximizer weights the utility of winning
the grand prize by the probability of winning it, which as we know from
Section 4.4 is low indeed. Thus, expected-utility theory says that such outcomes should not loom very large in our decision-making. Prospect theory
makes a different prediction. Winning the lottery and losing house, car, life,
and limb are positive- but low-probability events, so the probability-weighting function implies that they would loom relatively large. And when such
events loom large, people are willing to purchase lottery tickets and insurance policies. This helps explain why people fear airplane crashes, terrorist
attacks, and many other unlikely things so much. Probability-weighting also
explains why people purchase extended warranties on equipment such as
computers, in spite of the fact that simple expected-value calculations suggest that for most people extended warranties are not a very good deal (see
Exercise 6.19 on page 139).

===== PAGE 192 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 173

a[Pr(s)]
10) es

oa |------------------------b---

(0)
0

actiewmem he probability-weighting function z(-)

Table 7.5 Risk attitudes according to prospect theory

Pr(S)

Domain
Losses Gains
2 Low tisk averse tisk prone
3 Moderate risk prone tisk averse
& High risk prone tisk averse

Example 7.31 Freakonomics The book Freakonomics discusses the economics of crack-cocaine. Contrary to what many people think, the vast majority of
crack dealers make little money — frequently less than the federally mandated
minimum wage. They stay in the job, according to the Freakonomics authors,
because of a small chance of joining the upper stratum of the organization, in
which an exclusive “board of directors” makes decent money.

Even so, this does only seem to be part of the explanation. The directors
do not make astronomical amounts of money, the probability of joining their
group is small, and the probability of getting shot or landing in jail is high. We
can augment the explanation by adding that aspiring directors might overweight the low probability of rising through the ranks and joining the board
of directors. This is what prospect theory would predict.

As the authors suggest, the same analysis might apply to aspiring models,
actors, concert pianists, and CEOs. The probability of succeeding in any one
of these endeavors is low, yet people continue to bet that they will be the one
who does. Their aspirations may, in part, be driven by the fact that they overweight the probability of success.

The probability-weighting function can also account for the certainty effect: the
tendency to overweight outcomes that are certain (see Section 7.4). As Figure 7.6

===== PAGE 193 =====

174 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

Prospect theory

Prospect theory describes the process of making decisions as having two
phases. During the editing phase the decision maker edits the options to
facilitate assessment. Editing may involve a number of different operations, including:

© Coding: Describing outcomes as gains or losses as compared
to some reference point, which may be the current endowment,
somebody else’s current endowment, or an expectation of a future
endowment.

Combination: Combining identical outcomes into a simpler one,
so that a 25 percent chance of winning $1 and another 25 percent
chance of winning $1 get represented as a 50 percent chance of
winning $1.

Simplification: Simplifying the options, e.g., by rounding probabilities and outcomes. In particular, extremely small probabilities
may be rounded down to zero and eliminated from consideration.

During the subsequent evaluation phase the decision maker assesses
the edited options. The evaluation is based on two elements: the value
function from Sections 3.5 and 7.2 and the probability weighting function from Section 7.6. The value function v(-) is S-shaped, meaning convex in the realm of losses and concave in the realm of gains (see Figure
7.2 on page 155). The probability-weighting function 7(-) normally satisfies the following conditions: 7(0) = 0 and w(1) = 1; otherwise for low
probabilities (x) > x and for moderate and high probabilities w(x) < x
(see Figure 7.6 on page 173). The value (or weighted value) V(A,) of an
act A, is evaluated in accordance with the formula:

V(A) = a[Pr(S,)]* o(C,) + a[Px(S,)]*0(C,) + ... + a[Pr(S,)]*0(C,,)
= YalPr(s) oC).
jel

In the special case when a(x) = x and o(x) = u(x), the value of an option
equals its expected utility (see Definition 6.21 on page 142).

shows, there is a discontinuity at probabilities approaching one, so that as x >
1, lim a(x) < (1). Thus, events that are not certain (even when their probability
is very high) will be underweighted relative to events that are certain.

The upshot is that people’s behavior in the face of risk depends not just on
whether outcomes are construed as gains or as losses relative to some reference point, but on whether or not the relevant probabilities are low. In the
domain of losses, people tend to be risk prone, except for gambles involving a
low-probability event of significant (negative) value, in which case they may
be risk averse. In the domain of gains, people tend to be risk averse, except

===== PAGE 194 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 175

for gambles involving a low-probability event of significant (positive) value,
in which case they may be risk prone. See Table 7.5 for a summary of these
implications.

Example 7.32 Russian roulette Suppose that you are forced to play Russian
roulette, but that you have the option to pay to remove one bullet from the
loaded gun before pulling the trigger. Would you pay more to reduce the number of bullets in the cylinder from four to three or from one to zero? According
to Kahneman and Tversky, if you are like most people, you would pay more to
reduce the number from one to zero than from four to three. Why?

Reducing the number of bullets from four to three would reduce the probability of dying from 4/6 to 3/6. In this range, the probability-weighting function is relatively flat, meaning fairly unresponsive to changes in the underlying
probability. Reducing the number of bullets from one to zero would reduce
the probability of dying from 1/6 to 0. Here, there is a jump from (1/6) > 1/6
to (0) = 0. Thus, the value to you of reducing the number of bullets from one
to zero exceeds that of reducing it from four to three.

Exercise 7.33 Lotteries as rewards Behavioral economists have found that
using lotteries is an effective way to incentivize behavioral change. Thus, a
person may be more likely to fill in a survey or take a pill if offered a lottery
ticket with a 1/1000 probability of winning $1000 than if offered a cash payment of $1. This might seem counterintuitive, given that people are often risk
averse. Use the probability-weighting function to explain why lottery tickets
can be so appealing.

7.7 Discussion

In this chapter we have discussed situations in which people appear to violate
the standard implicit in the theory of expected utility outlined in Chapter 6.
The problem is not that people fail to maximize some mathematical utility
function in their heads. Rather, the problem is that people’s observed choices
diverge from the predictions of the theory. Though the divergences are not
universal, they are substantial, systematic, and predictable, and they can have
teal, and sometimes adverse, effects on people’s decision-making. Behavioral
economists take the existence of divergences to undercut the descriptive
adequacy of the theory of expected utility. Obviously, the chapter does not
purport to offer a complete list of violations of expected-utility theory. We
have also discussed situations where people’s firmly held intuitions about the
rational course of action differ from the recommendations of expected-utility
theory, as in the presence of ambiguous probabilities. This raises deep issues
about the nature of rationality.

In addition, we have explored more theoretical tools developed by
behavioral economists to capture the manner in which people actually make
decisions. Among other things, we studied other components of prospect
theory, including the S-shaped value function and the probability-weighting

===== PAGE 195 =====

176 Part 3

Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

function. This concludes our review of prospect theory (see text box on page
174). These tools can be used not just to explain and predict but also to influence other people’s evaluations. It appears that, under certain conditions, a
person’s risk preferences can be reversed simply by changing the frame of
the relevant options. This gives behavioral economists more levers to use,
which is obviously important for therapists, marketers, public health officials, and others who hope to affect people’s behavior. But again, knowledge of the tools also permits us to anticipate and prevent other people from
employing them.

In Section 6.6, we discussed the distinction between the rational and
the right, and the fact that you cannot judge the rationality of a decision
by examining the outcome alone. It will come as no surprise to hear that
people do, in fact, often judge the rationality of people’s decisions by the
outcome. This is called outcome bias, and the phenomenon appears to be
pervasive. Sports commentary offers many examples: coaches’ decisions
tend to be praised just in case they have the intended result independently
of whether their decisions were rational in the first place. (Of course, the fact
that a person’s decisions often turn out to be right is evidence in favor of
their rationality.) One person who understood outcome bias was the early
sixth-century Roman philosopher Boethius, who noted: “[The] world does
not judge actions on their merit, but on their chance results, and they consider that only those things which are blessed with a happy outcome have
been undertaken with sound advice.” Boethius knew about judgment. Once
a powerful public official, he wrote these lines on death row having been
convicted of sorcery and other charges. He was bludgeoned to death shortly
thereafter, but the work, The Consolations of Philosophy, became one of the
most widely read texts of the Middle Ages.

In Part 4 we will add another layer of complexity to the analysis, by introducing the topic of time.

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 7.34 Savings decisions You are lucky enough to have a
million dollars in the bank. You have decided that there are only three
serious investment options: putting it in your mattress, investing in
stocks, and investing in bonds. Your utility function over total wealth is
u(x) = Vx. There is no inflation.

(a) If you stick your money in the mattress (where we can assume that it
will be perfectly safe), how much utility will you have at the end of
the year?

(b) Bonds are in general very dependable, but markets have been jittery
as of late. You estimate that there is a 90 percent chance that you will
gain 4 percent, but there is a 10 percent chance that you will gain
nothing (zero percent). What is the expected utility of investing the
$1,000,000 in bonds?

===== PAGE 196 =====

Chapter 7 Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty 177

| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

(c) Stocks have recently been extremely volatile. If you invest in stocks,
there is a 40 percent chance that you will gain 21 percent, a 40 percent
chance that you will gain nothing (zero percent), and a 20 percent
chance that you will lose ten percent. What is the expected utility of
investing the $1,000,000 in stocks?

(d) Given that you are an expected-utility maximizer, what is the sensible thing to do with your money?

(e) If, instead of maximizing expected utility, you were exceedingly loss
averse, what would you do?

Exercise 7.35 Zero expected value Prospect theory is consistent with
the result that people frequently reject gambles with an expected value
of zero. Suppose you are facing a gamble G with a 1/2 probability of
winning $10 and a 1/2 probability of losing $10. According to prospect
theory, would you prefer the gamble or the status quo? Assume that your

value function is v(x) = Vx/2 for gains and o(x) = —2V|x| for losses.

Exercise 7.36 Life coaching Life coaches are people whose job it is to

help you deal with challenges in your personal and professional life.

(a) If you spend too much money, life coaches will sometimes suggest

that you cut up your credit cards and pay cash for everything. Use

the language of integration and segregation to explain how this is

supposed to help you rein in your spending.

In order to help you spend money more wisely, life coaches some-

times suggest you allocate your money between a number of enve-

lopes marked “food,” “drink,” “transportation,” etc. What is the

technical term for this kind of behavior?

(c) Though using the envelope technique may have real benefits, it can
also lead to problems. Identify some possible negative consequences
of this technique.

(b

a

Exercise 7.37 Match each of the vignettes below with one of the following phenomena: ambiguity aversion, cancellation, certainty effect, competence
hypothesis, silver lining, and mental accounting. If in doubt, pick the best fit.
(a) Abraham is seriously depressed after his girlfriend of several years
leaves him for his best friend. His therapist tells him that every time
a door closes, another one opens. Abraham thinks about all the other
potential girlfriends out there and finally feels a little better.

Berit is trying to save money by limiting the amount of money she
spends eating out. She tells herself she must never spend more than
$100 each week in restaurants. It is Sunday night, and Berit realizes
that she has spent no more than $60 eating out during the past week.
She does not quite feel like going out, but tells herself that she must
not miss the opportunity to have a $40 meal.

Charles is not much of a gambler and rarely accepts bets. The
exception is politics. He considers himself a true policy expert and

(b

a

{(¢

na

===== PAGE 197 =====

178 Part3 Choice under Risk and Uncertainty

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

is happy to accept bets when it comes to the outcome of local and
national elections. His friends note that he still does not win the bets
more than about half of the time.

(d) According to a common saying: “Better the devil you know than the
devil you don’t.”

(e) Elissa very much wants to go to medical school, but cannot stand the
thought of not knowing whether she will pass the rigorous curriculum. Instead, she decides to sign up for a less demanding physical
therapy curriculum that she is confident that she can pass.

Problem 7.38 Drawing on your own experience, make up stories like
those in Exercise 7.37 to illustrate the various ideas that you have read about
in this chapter.

FURTHER READING

Framing effects and probability weighting, which are part of prospect theory, are discussed in Kahneman and Tversky (1979); see also Tversky and Kahneman (1981), the
source of the Asian disease problem (p. 453). The example from the original prospecttheory paper appears in Kahneman and Tversky (1979, p. 273), and the two examples

of the certainty effect in Tversky and Kahneman (1986, pp. S266-69); the study that
manipulated people's perceptions of their income is Haisley et al. (2008). Bundling and
mental accounting are explored in Thaler (1980) and (1985) and hedonic editing in Thaler
and Johnson (1990). The Allais problem is due to Allais (1953); the certainty effect is
discussed in Tversky and Kahneman (1986). The Ellsberg problem is due to Ellsherg
(1961); the competence hypothesis is due to Heath and Tversky (1991). Donner is quoted
in Gardner (2012) and Rumsfeld in US Department of Defense (2002). Probabilityweighting is described in Kahneman and Tversky (1979); the roulette example (on p. 283)
is attributed to Zeckhauser. Freakonomics is Levitt and Dubner (2005). Outcome bias is
the topic of Baron and Hershey (1988); the lines from The Consolations of Philosophy
appear in Boethius (1999 [c¢ 524], p. 14).

===== PAGE 198 =====

PART

Intertemporal

Choice

8 The Discounted Utility Model

8.1 Introduction

8.2 Interest rates

8.3 Exponential discounting
8.4 What is the rational delta?
8.5 Discussion

9 Intertemporal Choice
9.1 Introduction

9.2 Hyperbolic discounting

9.3 Choosing not to choose

9.4 Preferences over profiles

9.5 Misprediction and miswanting
9.6 Discussion

===== PAGE 199 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 200 =====

CHAPTER
The Discounted Utility
Model

8.1 Introduction

So far, we have treated decision problems as though all possible consequences
of actions were instantaneous. That is, we have assumed that all relevant consequences occur more or less immediately, or at least at one and the same
time. There are cases when this is a perfectly reasonable assumption. If you are
playing roulette once and have preferences over money, for example, whatever happens will happen more or less at the same time.

Very often, however, time is a factor. When you decide whether to purchase the one-year warranty for your new tablet computer (see Exercise 6.19
on page 139), you are not only choosing between a sure option (investing in
the warranty) and a risky option (foregoing the warranty), but you are also
choosing between a certain loss now (since the warranty has to be paid for
now) and the possibility of suffering a loss later (the possibility of having to
pay to replace a broken tablet some time down the road).

It may be that most decisions have consequences that occur at different
points in time. Some decisions have immediate benefits and deferred costs:
procrastination, for example, is matter of favoring some immediate good (a
dinner and movie with friends) over some later benefit (a clean house). Other
decisions have immediate costs and deferred benefits: savings behavior, for
example, is a matter of favoring some later benefit (a comfortable retirement)
over some immediate good (a new car). In this chapter and the next, we will
talk about how to model decisions when time is a factor.

8.2 Interest rates

Before we begin the theory, let us talk about interest. Much of this should be
familiar, but knowing how to think about interest is so useful that it justifies a
teview. Evidence from studies like that in Exercise 1.3 on page 9 indicates that
many people have a limited grasp of how interest works.

Example 8.1 Interest Suppose you borrow $100 for a year at an annual
interest rate of 9 percent. At the end of the process, how much interest will
you owe the lender?

The answer is $100 * 0.09 = $9.

Slightly more formally, let r be the interest rate, P the principal (that is, the
amount you borrow), and I the interest. Then:

===== PAGE 201 =====

182 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

I=Pr (8.1)

This formula can be used to evaluate credit-card offers. Table 8.1 was adapted
from a website offering credit cards to people with bad credit. Given this
information, we can compute what it would cost to borrow a given amount
by charging it to the card.

Table 8.1 Credit-card offers for customers with bad credit

Credit-card offer APR Fee
Silver Axxess Visa Card 19.92% $48
Finance Gold MasterCard 13.75% $250
Continental Platinum MasterCard 19.92% $49
Gold Image Visa Card 17.75% $36
Archer Gold American Express 19.75% $99
Total Tribute American Express 18.25% $150
Splendid Credit Eurocard 22.25% $72

Example 8.2 Cost of credit Suppose you need to invest $1000 in a new car
for one year. If you charge it to the Silver Axxess Visa Card, what is the total
cost of the credit, taking into account the fact that you would be charged both
interest and an annual fee?

Given that the Annual Percentage Rate (APR) r = 19.92% = 0.1992, you can
compute I = Pr = $1000 * 0.1992 = $199.20. The annual fee is $48. The total
cost would be the interest (J) plus the annual fee: $199.20 + $48 = $247.20.

Expressed as a fraction of the principal, this is almost 25 percent. And that is
not the worst offer, as the next exercise will make clear.

Exercise 8.3 Cost of credit, cont. What would it cost to borrow $1000 for
one year using one of the other credit cards in Table 8.1? What if you need
$100 or $10,000?

Fees and APRs fluctuate; never make decisions about credit cards without
looking up the latest figures.

At the end of the year, the lender will want the principal back. In
Example 8.1 above, the lender will expect the $100 principal as well as the $9
interest, for a total of $109. Let L be the liability, that is, the total amount you
owe the lender at the end of the year. Then:

L=PtI (8.2)
Substituting for I from (8.1) in (8.2), we get:
L=P+I=P+(P)=P0+7 (8.3)

It is sometimes convenient to define R as one plus r:

R=1+r (8.4)

===== PAGE 202 =====

Chapter 8 The Discounted Utility Model

Together, (8.3) and (8.4) imply that:
L=PR (8.5)

Returning to Example 8.1, we can use this formula to compute the liability:
L = $100 * (1 + 0.09) = $109, as expected. These formulas can also be used to
compute interest rates given the liability and the principal.

Example 8.4 Implicit interest Suppose that somebody offers to lend you
$105 on condition that you pay them back $115 one year later. What is the
interest rate (r) implicit in this offer?

We know that P = $105 and L = $115. (8.5) implies that R = L/P = $115/$105
= 1.095. By (8.4), r = R — 1 = 1.095 — 1 = 0.095. Thus, the potential lender is
implicitly offering you a loan at an annual interest rate of 9.5 percent.

Exercise 8.5 Payday loans Payday loan establishments offer short-term
loans to be repaid on the borrower’s next payday. Fees fluctuate, but such
an establishment may offer you $400 on the 15th of the month, provided you
repay $480 two weeks later. Over the course of the two weeks, what is the
interest rate (r) implicit in this offer?

In some US states, the number of payday loan establishments exceeds the
number of Starbucks and McDonald’s locations combined. The answer to
Exercise 8.5 suggests why. (See also Exercise 8.9.)

We can extend the analysis over longer periods of time. Broadly speaking,
there are two kinds of scenario that merit our attention. Here is the first:

Example 8.6 Simple interest Imagine that you use a credit card to borrow
$100, and that every month the credit-card company will charge you an interest rate of 18 percent of the principal. Every month, you pay only interest, but
you pay it off in full. At the end of the year, you also repay the $100 principal.
What is the total interest over the course of a year, expressed both in dollars
and as a fraction of the principal?

Every month, by (8.1), you have to pay the credit-card company I = Pr =
$100 * 0.18 = $18 in interest. Because you have to do this 12 times, the total
interest will amount to $18 * 12 = $216. As a fraction of the $100 principal, this
equals $216/$100 = 2.16 = 216 percent.

This is a case of simple interest. You can get the same figure by multiplying 18
percent by 12. Here is the other kind of case:

Example 8.7 Compound interest Imagine, again, that you use a credit card
to borrow $100 and that the monthly interest rate is 18 percent. In contrast to
the previous example, however, you do not make monthly interest payments.
Instead, every month your interest is added to the principal. What is the total
interest over the course of a year, expressed both in dollars and as a fraction
of the principal?

At the conclusion of the first month, by (8.3), given that r = 0.18, you will
owe L = P(1 + 7) = $100 * 1.18 = $118. At the conclusion of the second month,

183

===== PAGE 203 =====

184 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

your liability will be L = $118 * 1.18 = $139.24. Notice that you could have
gotten the same answer by computing L = $100 * 1.18 * 1.18 = $100 * 1.18".
At the conclusion of the third month, your liability will be L = $100 * 1.18 *
1.18 * 1.18 = $100 * 1.18° = 164.30. At the conclusion of the 12th month, your
liability will be L = $100 * 1.18” = $728.76. The liability at the end of the year
includes the $100 principal, so your interest payments, by (8.2), only add up to
I=L— P = $728.76 — $100 = $628.76. As a fraction of the principal, this equals
$628.76/$100 = 6.2876 = 628.76 percent.

The answer to Example 8.7 is so much higher than the answer to Example
8.6 because the former involves compound interest. Unlike the case of simple interest, here the interest accumulated during the first period is added
to the principal, so that you will end up paying interest on the interest
accumulated during previous periods. Notice that in cases of compound
interest, you cannot simply multiply the interest accumulated during the
first period by the number of periods, as we did in the case of simple interest. Instead, with compound interest your liability after t periods is computed as:

L=PR (8.6)

This formula gives us the answer to part (c) of Exercise 1.3, by the way: $200
* (1 + 0.10)? = $242.

Albert Einstein is sometimes quoted as having said that compound interest is one of the most powerful forces in the universe. This would have been a
wonderful quotation, had he actually said it, but there is no evidence that he
did. Even so, you can get the power of compounding to work in your favor by
saving your money and allowing the interest to accumulate.

Exercise 8.8 Savings Suppose that you put $100 into a savings account
today and that your bank promises a 5 percent annual interest rate.

(a) What will your bank’s liability be after 1 year?

(b) After 10 years?

(c) After 50 years?

Finally, let us return to the payday loan establishments.

Exercise 8.9 Payday loans, cont. Imagine that you borrow $61 from a pay-

day loan establishment. After one week, it wants the principal plus 10 percent

interest back. But you will not have that kind of money; so, instead, you go

to another establishment and borrow the money you owe the first one. You

do this for one year. Interest rates do not change from one establishment to

another, or from one week to another.

(a) How much money will you owe at the end of the year?

(b) What is the total amount of interest that you will owe at the end of the
year, in dollar terms?

(c) What is the total amount of interest that you will owe at the end of the
year, expressed as a fraction of the principal?

(d) What does this tell you about the wisdom of taking out payday loans?

===== PAGE 204 =====

Chapter 8 The Discounted Utility Model

Payday loan establishments have generated controversy, with some state legislatures capping the interest rates they may charge. Such controversy is not
new. For much of the Christian tradition, it was considered a crime against
nature to charge interest on loans, that is, to engage in usury. According to
Dante’s Divina Commedia, usurers are condemned to eternal suffering in the
seventh circle of hell, in the company of blasphemers and sodomites; you
know where Dante would have expected to find payday loan officers. On the
other hand, payday loan establishments provide a service that (rational and
well-informed) people may have reason to demand. Parents may be willing
to pay a premium to have money for Christmas presents at Christmas rather
than in January, for example.

Either way, as these exercises show, knowing the basics about interest rates
can be enormously useful. Now, let us return the theory of decision.

8.3 Exponential discounting

Which is better, $100 today or $100 tomorrow? $1000 today or $1000 next year?
The chances are you prefer your money today. There are exceptions — and we
will discuss some of these in the next chapter — but typically people prefer
money sooner rather than later. This is not to say that tomorrow you will enjoy a
dollar any less than you would today. But it is to say that, from the point of view of
today, the utility of a dollar today is greater than the utility of a dollar tomorrow.

There are many reasons why you might feel this way. The earlier you get
your money, the more options will be available to you: some options may only
be available for a limited period, and you can always save your money and go
for a later option. In addition, the earlier you get your money, the longer you
can save it, and the more interest you can earn. Whatever the reason, when
things that happen in the future do not give you as much utility, from the
point of view of today, as things that happen today, we say that you discount
the future. The general term is time discounting. The extent to which you discount the future will be treated as a matter of personal preference, specifically,
what we call time preference.

There is a neat model that captures the basic idea that people prefer their
money sooner rather than later: the model of exponential discounting. Suppose
that u > 0 is the utility you derive from receiving a dollar today. From your curtent point of view, as we established, the utility of receiving a dollar tomorrow
is less than u. We capture this by multiplying the utility of receiving a dollar
now by some fraction. We will use the Greek letter delta (8) to denote this fraction, which we call the discount factor. Thus, from your current point of view,
a dollar tomorrow is worth 6 * u = 6u. As long as 0 < 6 < 1, as we generally
assume, this means that 6u < u. Hence, today you will prefer a dollar today to
a dollar tomorrow, as expected. From the point of view of today, a dollar the
day after tomorrow will be worth 6 * 6 * u = &u. Because &u < 6u, today you
prefer a dollar tomorrow to a dollar the day after tomorrow, again as expected.

In general, we want to be able to evaluate a whole sequence of utilities,
that is, a utility stream. Letting f represent time, we will use t = 0 to represent

185

===== PAGE 205 =====

186 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

today, f = 1 to represent tomorrow, and so on. Meanwhile, we let u, denote the
utility you receive at time ¢, so that u, represents the utility you receive today,
u, represents the utility you receive tomorrow, and so on. We write U'(u) to
denote the utility of stream u from time f. The number we seek is the utility
U°(u) of the entire utility stream u = {u,, u,, Uy, ...).

Definition 8.10 The delta function According to the delta function, the
utility U°(u) of utility stream u = (u, u,, u,, ...) from the point of view of t = 0 is:

U(u) =u, + du, + Pu, + Fu,+ ...

=u,t Sd,
i=1

Thus, you evaluate different utility streams by adding the utility you would
receive now, 6 times the utility you would receive the next round, & times
the utility you would receive in the round after that, and so on. The resulting
model is called the delta model.

Utility streams can be represented in table form, as in Table 8.2. An empty
cell means that the utility received at that time is zero. In order to compute the
utility from the point of view of time zero, or any other point in time, you just
need to know the discount factor 6. As soon as we are given the discount factor, we can use Definition 8.10 to determine which option you should choose.

Table 8.2 Simple time-discounting

problem
#=0 t=1 £=2
a 1
b 3
¢c 4
d 1 3 4

Example 8.11 Exponential discounting Suppose that 5 = 0.9, and that each
utility stream is evaluated from t = 0. If so, U°(a) = u, = 1, U%(b) = Su, = 0.9
#3 = 2.7, Uc) = &u, = 0.9? * 4 = 3.24, and Ud) = u, + du, + &u,=1+ 2.7
+ 3.24 = 6.94. Hence, if given the choice between all four alternatives, you
would choose d. If given the choice between a, b, and c, you would choose c.

Exercise 8.12 Exponential discounting, cont. Suppose instead that 5 = 0.1.

(a) Compute the utility of each of the four utility streams from the point of
view of ft = 0.

(b) What would you choose if given the choice between all four?

(c) What if you had to choose between a, b, and ¢?

As these calculations show, your discount factor can have a dramatic impact
on your choices. If your discount factor is high (that is, close to one) what
happens in future periods matters a great deal. That is to say that you exhibit
patience: you do not discount your future very much. If your discount factor

===== PAGE 206 =====

Chapter 8 The Discounted Utility Model

is low (that is, close to zero) what happens in the future matters little. That is
to say that you exhibit impatience: you discount your future heavily. It should
be clear how the value of 6 captures your time preference.

Exercise 8.13 The ant and the grasshopper According to the fable, the
grasshopper chirped and played all summer while the ant was collecting
food. When winter came, the ant had plenty of food but the grasshopper died
from hunger. What can you surmise about their deltas?

Economists believe discount factors can be used to explain a great deal of
behavior. If your discount factor is low, you are more likely to spend money,
procrastinate, do drugs, and have unsafe sex. If your discount factor is high,
you are more likely to save money, plan for the future, say no to drugs, and
use protection. Notice that this line of thought makes all these behaviors at
least potentially rational. For somebody who discounts the future enough,
there is nothing irrational about nurturing a crack-cocaine habit. In fact, Gary
Becker (whom we came across in Section 2.8) is famous, among other things,
for defending a theory of rational addiction.

Exercise 8.14 Discount factors For each of the following, identify whether
the person’s 6 is likely to be high (as in close to one) or low (as in close to zero):
(a) A person who raids his trust fund to purchase a convertible.

(b) A person who enrolls ina MD/PhD program.

(c) A person who religiously applies sunscreen before leaving the house.

atica-mm Time preference. Illustration by Cody Taylor

187

===== PAGE 207 =====

188 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

(d) A person who skips her morning classes to go rock climbing.
(e) The Iroquois Native American who requires that every deliberation must
consider the impact on the seventh generation.

Exercise 8.15 The impartial spectator Adam Smith’s Theory of Moral
Sentiments made a big deal of the differences between an “impartial spectator” and our actual selves. An impartial spectator, Smith wrote, “does not feel
the solicitations of our present appetites. To him the pleasure which we are to
enjoy a week hence, or a year hence, is just as interesting as that which we are
to enjoy this moment.” When it comes to our actual selves, by contrast: “The
pleasure which we are to enjoy ten years hence interests us so little in comparison with that which we may enjoy to-day.” If we interpret the difference
in terms of deltas, what would this entail when it comes to the deltas of (a) the
impartial spectator, and (b) our actual selves?

Discounting can usefully be represented graphically. We put time on the x-axis
and utility on the y-axis. A bar of height u at time t represents a reward worth
u utiles to you when you get it at time ¢. A curve represents how much receiving the reward at t is worth to you from the point of view of times before f. As
we know from Definition 8.10, that is 6u at t — 1, 6 at f — 2, and soon. Asa
result, we end up with a picture like Figure 8.2. As you move to the left from
t, the reward becomes increasingly distant, and therefore becomes worth less
and less to you in terms of utility.

We can use this graphical device to represent the difference between people
with high and low 6s. If 6 is high, 6u will not differ much from u, and the curve
will be relatively flat: it will only approach the x-axis slowly as you move to
the left in the diagram, like the dashed curve in Figure 8.2. If 6 is low, 6u will
be much lower than u, and the curve will be relatively steep: it will approach
the x-axis quickly as you move to the left in the diagram, like the dot-dashed

U(x)
u

t-2 t-1 t

Im Figure 8.2 | ateieswm Exponential discounting

===== PAGE 208 =====

Chapter 8 The Discounted Utility Model

curve in the figure. Again, if 6 is high, the person does not discount the future
very much, and the curve is flat; if 5 is low, the person does discount the future
a great deal, and the curve is steep.

So far, we have used our knowledge of 6 to determine a person’s preferences over utility streams. Definition 8.10 also permits us to go the other
way, as it were. Knowing the person’s preferences over utility streams, we can
determine the value of her discount factor.

Example 8.16 Indifference Suppose that Alexandra, at time zero, is indifferent between utility streams a (2 utiles at t = 0) and b (6 utiles at t = 1). What
is her discount factor 6?

Given that Alexandra is indifferent between a and b at time zero, we
know that U°(a) = U°(b), which implies that 2 = 66 which is to say that 6 =
2/6 =1/3.

When experimental economists study time discounting in the laboratory, they
tely heavily on this kind of calculation. As soon as a laboratory subject is indifferent between an immediate and a delayed reward, his or her discount factor
can easily be estimated.

Exercise 8.17 Astitchintime “Astitch in time saves nine,” people say when
they want you to do something now rather than later. But not everyone will
be swayed by that sort of concern. Suppose that you can choose between one
stitch at time zero and nine stitches at time one, and that each stitch gives you
a utility of —1. What does it take for you to prefer the one stitch now?

Indifference can be represented graphically. Indifference between options a
and b in Example 8.16 means that the picture would look like Figure 8.3. It can
easily be ascertained that a strict preference for a over b would imply that a<
1/3 and that a strict preference for b over a would imply that @ > 1/3.

U(x)
u

t-1 t

actice-em Exponential discounting with indifference

189

===== PAGE 209 =====

190 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

Exercise 8.18 Use Figure 8.3 to answer the following questions:
(a) If 6 <1/3, what would the curve look like?
(b) What if 6 > 1/3?

Exercise 8.19 This exercise refers to the utility streams in Table 8.2. For each
of the following people, compute 6.

(a) Att = 0, Ahmed is indifferent between utility streams a and b.

(b) Att = 0, Bella is indifferent between utility streams b and c.

(c) Att = 0, Cathy is indifferent between utility streams a and c.

(d) Att = 1, Darrence is indifferent between utility streams b and c.

Exercise 8.20 For each of the three decision problems in Table 8.3, compute
6 on the assumption that a person is indifferent between a and b at time zero.

Table 8.3 Time-discounting problems

£=0 t=1
a 3 4
b 5 1
(a)
#=0 f=1 t=2 #=0 f=1 f=2
a 6 1 a 1 1
3 4 5
(b) ©

Exercise 8.21 As a financial advisor, you offer your clients the possibility
to invest in an asset that generates a utility stream of 1 utile this year (¢ = 0),
0 utiles next year (f = 1), and 1 utile the year after that (f = 2). For each of the
following clients, determine their 2.

(a) Client P is indifferent between the investment and 2 utiles next year.

(b) Client Q is indifferent between the investment and 1 utile this year.

(c) Client R is indifferent between the investment and 1.25 utiles this year.

All the decision problems we have encountered so far in this chapter were
defined by matrices of utilities. Very often, however, the relevant outcomes are
given in dollars, lives saved, or the like. Given the appropriate utility function,
however, we know how to deal with those problems too.

Example 8.22 Suppose you are indifferent between utility streams a and b
in Table 8.4(a). Your utility function is u(x) = Vx. What is your 5?

Given the utility function, Table 8.4(a) can be converted into a matrix
of utilities as in Table 8.4(b). We can compute 6 by setting up the following
equation: 3 + 62 = 1 + 65. Or we can simply set up the following equation:
V9 + 8V4= V1+ 8V25. Either way, the answer is 6 = 2/3.

Exercise 8.23 Suppose instead that the utility function is u(x) = x2. What
would Table 8.4(b) look like, and what would 6 be?

===== PAGE 210 =====

Chapter 8 The Discounted Utility Model

Table 8.4 Time-discounting problem (in dollars and utiles)

#=0 t=1 £=0 t=1
a $9 $4 a 3 2
b $1 $25 b 1 5
(a) In dollar terms (b) In utility terms

Discount rates

Sometimes discounting is expressed in terms of a discount rate r rather
than a discount factor 6. The conversion is easy:

You can confirm that when 6 = 1, r = 0 and that as 6 approaches zero,
r increases. Knowing r, you can compute 6 as follows:

1
é= —_.
1+r
In this text, I favor discount factors over discount rates. But it is useful to
know what both are.

8.4 What is the rational delta?

In the above, I have followed what is common practice and treated the value
of the discount factor 6 (and discount rate 7) as a mere preference. On this
approach, a person’s discount factor is just a personal matter, much like your
preference for blueberry ice-cream over raspberry ice-cream, or your preference for having ice-cream rather than throwing yourself out of the window.
In other words, rationality does not require you to have one delta rather than
another. One implication of this analysis, as we saw in the previous section,
is that destructive behaviors like heavy drug use are perfectly consistent with
rationality: if your discount factor is very low, aiming for instant gratification
is perfectly rational in this analysis. Rationality does require you to consistently apply one discount factor, however. You cannot rationally plan for the
future now and then act impulsively later; you cannot rationally act as though
you have a high delta now and a low delta later. An inconsistent drug user is
indeed irrational.

Historically, a number of thinkers have disagreed, and instead argued
that time discounting (with 6 < 1 and r > 0) arises from some intellectual
or moral deficiency. The economist A. C. Pigou, commonly considered the
father of welfare economics, wrote that “this preference for present pleasures ... implies only that our telescopic faculty is defective, and that we,

===== PAGE 211 =====

192 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

therefore, see future pleasures, as it were, on a diminished scale.” The polymath Frank P. Ramsey, who made path-breaking contributions to philosophy,
statistics, and economics — his theory of saving is still taught in graduatelevel macroeconomics courses — before dying at the age of 26, called time discounting “a practice which is ethically indefensible and arises merely from
the weakness of the imagination.” Some describe time discounting as a sort
of crime committed by the current you against the future you — who is, they
add, the person who should matter the most to you now. If these thinkers are
right, repairing our intellectual and moral deficiencies would return us to a
delta of one.

Others have advocated discounting the future. “Seize the day,” or carpe
diem, said the ancient poet Horace — and Robin Williams in Dead Poets Society —
encouraging us to live in the present. Seneca, whom we came across in our
discussion of the aspiration treadmill in Section 3.5, wrote:

Can anything be more thoughtless than the judgement of those men who boast of
their forethought? ... They organize their thoughts with the distant future in mind;
but the greatest waste of life consists in postponement: that is what takes away each
day as it comes, that is what snatches away the present while promising something
to follow. The greatest obstacle to living is expectation, which depends on tomorrow and wastes today.

This passage appears in a treatise titled On the Shortness of Life, in which
Seneca argues that life is long enough — the problem being that so much of
it is squandered. In the same spirit it is not uncommon for people to volunteer the advice that you should live every moment as though it were your
last. The late Apple founder Steve Jobs was one of them: “I have looked in
the mirror every morning and asked myself: ‘If today were the last day of
my life, would I want to do what I am about to do today?’” Then again,
Harvard psychologist Daniel Gilbert quips that such a comment “only goes
to show that some people would spend their final [moments] giving other
people dumb advice.” (Some of these figures might have been talking about
uncertainty too, since the future is not only removed in time, it is also as yet
unrealized.)

There is some evidence that having a high discount factor is good for a
person in the long term. The 2014 book The Marshmallow Test reviews a series
of studies performed with children as young as four, who are given the choice
between one marshmallow (or similar treat) now, or two such treats if they
are able to wait for some 15 minutes. Since the first experiment in the series
was performed in the 1960s, experimenters have been able to track the performance of the original participants in a variety of domains of life. Remarkably,
children who were able to defer gratification in preschool exhibited better concentration, intelligence, self-reliance, and confidence in adolescence and were
better able to pursue and reach long-term goals, enjoyed higher educational
attainment, and had a lower body-mass index in adulthood. This might strike
you as an argument for having a high delta. Then again, if your delta is low
now, it is not as though you will care about adverse long-term consequences
of time discounting — or anything else.

===== PAGE 212 =====

Chapter 8 The Discounted Utility Model

8.5 Discussion

In this chapter we have explored issues of interest — simple and compound —
as well as exponential discounting. The model of exponential discounting has
a remarkable feature in that it is the only model of discounting that entails
time consistency. Consistency is an important topic in intertemporal decisionmaking, and we will return to it in Section 9.2. Though relatively simple, exponential discounting offers an extraordinarily powerful model. For this reason,
it is critical to a variety of fields, including in cost-benefit analysis, to assess
the costs and benefits of deferred outcomes, and in finance, to determine the
present value of alternative investments. While the model might seem intuitively appealing and uncontroversial from both a descriptive and a normative
perspective, it is anything but.

In Section 8.4, we saw that a person’s discount factor delta is typically
treated as a mere preference: as long as you are consistent in your attitudes to
the future, rationality is consistent with any delta. In some contexts, however,
we do not have the luxury of sidestepping the issue. When computing the
costs and benefits of long-term investments, for example, some delta just has
to be assumed and the specific value can matter hugely. Many investments
(like railroads) have large upfront costs and benefits that extend into the indefinite future. If costs and benefits are computed with a low delta, the former
will dominate and the project will be a no-go; if they are computed with a high
delta, the latter will dominate, and the project will be a go. And there is simply
no obvious, uncontroversial way to choose a number. Perhaps most prominently, the topic comes up in the discussion of climate change. On the assumption that taking action to prevent or mitigate the negative consequences of
climate change would be costly in the short term but (at least potentially) beneficial in the long term, cost-benefit analysis with a high enough 6 will favor
taking action, but cost-benefit analysis with a low enough 6 will favor not
taking action. Thus, the rationality of taking action to prevent or mitigate the
effects of climate change depends on the value of 6 - and, again, there is no
agreement whatsoever about the appropriate value of the parameter.

In the next chapter, we will discuss to what extent the exponential model
of time discounting captures the manner in which people make decisions and
whether it is appropriate as a normative standard.

| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 8.24 Youth sports In a 2014 interview, basketball star Kobe
Bryant discussed the importance of making sports fun for young people.
“It's hard to tell a kid that you need to get out there and compete because
it’s going to decrease your chance of having diabetes 30-40 years from.
now,” he said. In the language of time discounting, why are young people not motivated by the prospect of being healthy in 30-40 years?

193

===== PAGE 213 =====

194 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

|| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

Exercise 8.25 Credit scores A study in the journal Psychological Science
by two economists from the Federal Reserve Bank in Boston found a
connection between people’s discount factor 6 and their credit score.
A credit score is a number representing a person’s creditworthiness: the
higher the score the better. Based on your understanding of discounting
behavior:

(a) What is the connection? That is, do people with higher discount fac-

tors tend to have higher credit scores, or the other way around?

(b) Explain why that would be so.

Exercise 8.26 Time discounting and interest rates +Whether you should
spend or save will depend not just on your time preference, but on the
interest you can get when putting your money in a savings account.
Suppose you have the option of spending $w now or saving it until next
year. If you save it, the bank will pay you interest rate i.

(a) Suppose that your utility function is u(x) = x. What does your discount factor 6 need to be for you to be indifferent between spending
it now and saving it? What about your discount rate r (see the text
box on page 191)?

(b) Suppose that your utility function is u(x) = Vx. What does your discount factor 6 need to be for you to be indifferent between spending
it now and saving it? What about your discount rate r?

FURTHER READING

Mas-Colell et al. (1995, Chapter 20) contains a more advanced discussion of intertemporal utility. The battle over payday loan establishments is covered by the Wall Street Journal
(Anand, 2008). Smith (2002 [1759], p. 221-22) compares our actual selves to the
impartial spectator. Pigou (1952 [1920], p. 25} discusses our flawed telescopic faculty
and Ramsey (1928, p. 543) our weakness of imagination. Seneca (2007 [c 49], p. 148)
and Jobs (2005) advocate living in the present, while Gilbert (2006, p. xiii) quips. The
Marshmalfow Testis Mischel (2014). Kobe Bryant is quoted in Shelburne (201 4) and the
study from the Boston Fed is Meier and Sprenger (2012).

===== PAGE 214 =====

CHAPTER
Intertemporal Choice

9.1 Introduction

As the many examples in the previous chapter suggest, the model of exponential discounting can be used to accommodate a variety of behavior
patterns. For this reason, and because of its mathematical tractability, the
model is heavily relied upon in a variety of disciplines. Yet it fails to capture
some of the things people do. In this chapter we focus on two phenomena
that are not easily described in using the standard model. One is that people are time inconsistent; that is, their preferences appear to change for no
reason other than the passing of time, as when a drug addict who woke
up in the morning completely determined to clean up his act gives in and
takes more drugs in the afternoon. Because people sometimes anticipate
time-inconsistent behavior, they choose not to choose; that is, they take action
intended to prevent themselves from taking action. Another phenomenon
is the fact that people seem to have preferences over utility profiles; that is,
they care about the shape of their utility stream, and not just about the (discounted) individual utilities. We will also study how behavioral economists
go about capturing these phenomena. Time inconsistency will be captured
by means of a model of hyperbolic discounting, a highly versatile model.
We will see that the model of hyperbolic discounting does a good job of
capturing time inconsistency, but that it is inadequate to account for preferences over profiles.

9.2 Hyperbolic discounting

As we saw in the previous chapter, the exponential discounting model can
capture a great deal of behavior, including — perhaps surprisingly — forms of
addiction. Yet the image of the rational addict does not sit well with observed
behavior and first-person reports of many addicts. As the beat poet William S.
Burroughs writes in the prologue to his autobiographical novel Junky:

The question is frequently asked: Why does a man become a drug addict? The
answer is that he usually does not intend to become an addict. You don’t wake up
one morning and decide to be a drug addict ... One morning you wake up sick and
you're an addict.

Later in this chapter, we will discuss other behaviors that are hard to reconcile
with the model of exponential discounting.

===== PAGE 215 =====

196 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

Exponential discounting implies the agent’s behavior is time consistent,
meaning that his or her preferences over two options do not change simply
because time passes. If you are time consistent and feel (today) that a is better
than b, then you felt the same way about a and b yesterday, and you will feel
the same way about them tomorrow.

It is relatively easy to prove that anybody who discounts the future exponentially will be time consistent. But first we will need to review some notation. We continue to let U'(a) denote the utility from the point of view of time f
of receiving some utility stream a. Let u, refer to the utility received at time ft.
Then, U'(u,) refers to the utility, from the point of view of t, of receiving u, at
time ¢’. As an example, if u,____,,, tefers to the utility you will receive tomorrow from eating ice-cream tomorrow, then U**v(u, |.) is the utility, from
the point of view of today, of eating ice-cream tomorrow. This number would
normally be high, but not as high as Ut™r"(u, ss), which is the utility you
will receive tomorrow when you eat ice-cream tomorrow.

Suppose you are facing two rewards a and b, as in Figure 8.3 on page 189.
Let us say that a gives you u, at time t, and that b gives you u,,, at time t + 1.
Imagine that, from the point of view of time t, you strictly prefer a to b, that
is, U'{a) > U'(b). If so, given that you are an exponential discounter, U'(a) >
U'(b) implies that u, > u,,,. Now let us look at what is going on before t, for
example, at time t — 1. Would it be possible to weakly prefer b to a? If you did,
U'~\(b) = Ua), and &u,,, = du, Since 6 > 0, we can divide by 6 on both
sides, which gives us 6u,,, = u, which is a contradiction. So at t — 1, you must
strictly prefer a to b. What about ¢ — 2? The same conclusion obtains and for
the same reason. What about f — 3? We could go on.

In brief, if you discount the future exponentially, you must be time consistent. Graphically, what this means is that you either prefer a to b at all times
(as in the dotted line in Figure 9.1), or you prefer b to a at all times (as in the
dashed line in Figure 9.1), or you are indifferent between the two options (as
in Figure 8.3 on page 189). At no point will the two lines cross. Your preference
over a and b will never change simply because time passes.

The bad news, from the point of view of this model, is that people violate
time consistency with alarming regularity. In the morning, we swear never
to touch alcohol again; yet, by the time happy hour comes around, we gladly
order another martini. On January 1, we promise our partners that we will
stop smoking and start exercising; yet, when opportunity arises, we completely ignore our promises. Time inconsistency is nicely embodied in the figure of Iya Ilyich Oblomov, who may be the most prominent procrastinator in
all of literature. Here is how he appears on the first page of the book:

[In] his dark-grey eyes there was an absence of any definite idea, and in his other
features a total lack of concentration. Suddenly a thought would wander across his
face with the freedom of a bird, flutter for a moment in his eyes, settle on his halfopened lips, and remain momentarily lurking in the lines of his forehead. Then it
would disappear, and once more his face would glow with a radiant insouciance
which extended even to his attitude and the folds of his night-robe.

If this is unfamiliar, good for you! Otherwise, you will probably agree that
time inconsistency is common. Graphically, we seem to discount the future
in accordance with Figure 9.2. That is, at time t — 1 (and possibly right

===== PAGE 216 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice 197

U(x)
1 t
| Figure 9.1 | Time-consistent preferences
U(x)
t-2 +1 t

mI Figure 9.2 | Time-inconsistent preferences

before it), we want the smaller, more immediate reward; earlier than that,
we want the larger, more distant reward.

It turns out that this kind of behavior can be usefully modeled with a slight
variation of Definition 8.10 on page 186.

Definition 9.1 The beta-delta function According to the beta-delta
function, the utility U°(a) of utility stream u = (uy u, u, ...) from the point of
view of t = 0 is:

UP(u) =u, + Bou, + BEu, + BE u, 4

=Uyt Spo,
i=1

===== PAGE 217 =====

198 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

If you act in accordance with this formula, you evaluate utility streams by adding the utility you would receive now, §6 times the utility you would receive
the next round, 85? times the utility you would receive in the round after that,
and so on. The only difference relative to the exponential discounting function is that all utilities except u, are multiplied by an additional 8, which is
assumed to be a number such that 0 < £8 = 1. Notice that while 6 is raised
to higher powers (6, &, &, ...) for later rewards, B is not. This form of discounting is called quasi-hyperbolic discounting. Here, I loosely refer to it as
hyperbolic discounting. The resulting model is called the beta—delta model.

The introduction of the parameter 8 makes an interesting difference. When
B = 1, an agent who discounts the future hyperbolically will behave exactly
like an agent who discounts the future exponentially. For, if 8 = 1, the hyperbolic discounter will maximize the following expression:

U(u) =u, + Pdu, + But ... =u, tdu,+&u,t ...,

0 1 2

which is identical to the delta function (Definition 8.10). When p < 1, however, things are different. In this case, all outcomes beyond the present time get
discounted more than under exponential discounting, as shown in Figure 9.3.
Compare this figure with Figure 8.2 on page 188. As you can tell, the hyperbolic
curve is relatively steep between t and f — 1, and relatively flat before t — 1.

Exercise 9.2 The beta-delta function Suppose that you are facing a utility
stream of 1 utile at t = 0,3 utiles at t = 1, and 9 utiles at t = 2. For each of the
following parameter values, apply the beta—delta function to determine the
discounted utility of the stream.

(a) B=1/3 and 6 =1.

(b) B = 1and 6 = 2/3.

(c) B=1/3 and 6 = 2/3.

U(x)

Bou
Bd?u

t-2 t-1 t

| Figure 9.3 | Hyperbolic discounting

===== PAGE 218 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice

When an agent discounts the future hyperbolically, if given a choice between a
smaller, earlier reward and a bigger, later reward, the picture may well end up
looking like Figure 9.2. The result is what Russians call “Oblomovitis” — in the
novel, and sometimes in real life, a deadly condition. The fact that hyperbolic
discounting may lead to time-inconsistent behavior can be shown algebraically, too.

Example 9.3 Hyperbolic discounting Suppose that you are on a diet, but
have to decide whether to have a slice of red-velvet cake at a party some random Saturday. Eating the cake would give you a utility of 4. If you have the
cake, however, you will have to exercise for hours on Sunday, which would
give you a utility of 0. The other option is to skip the cake, which would give
you a utility of 1, and to spend Sunday relaxing in front of the television, for a
utility of 6. Thus, you are facing the choice depicted in Table 9.1. You discount
the future hyperbolically, with 8 = 1/2 and 6 = 2/3. Questions:
(a) From the point of view of Friday, what is the utility of eating the cake
(c) and of skipping it (d)? Which would you prefer?
(b) From the point of view of Saturday, what is the utility of eating the cake
and of skipping it? Which would you prefer?

Table 9.1 Red-velvet problem

Saturday Sunday
c 4 0
1 6

"7

(a) From the point of view of Friday, Friday is t = 0, Saturday is f = 1, and
Sunday is f = 2. From this point of view, eating the cake is associated with
utility stream c = (0, 4, 0) and not eating the cake is associated with utility
stream d = (0, 1, 6). Consequently, from the point of view of Friday, the
utility of eating the cake is:

Uc) = 0 + 1/2* 2/3 #4 + 1/2 (2/3)? #0 = 4/3.

Meanwhile, from the point of view of Friday, the utility of skipping the
cake is:

Ud) = 0 + 1/2 * 2/3 *1 + 1/2 (2/3) #6 = 5/3.

From the point of view of Friday, therefore, you will prefer to skip the cake
and stick to your diet.

From the point of view of Saturday, Saturday is t = 0 and Sunday is t = 1.
From this point of view, eating the cake is associated with utility stream
c = (4,0) and not eating the cake is associated with utility stream d = (1, 6).
Consequently, from the point of view of Saturday, the utility of eating the
cake is:

(b

rad

U%(c) =4 4+ 1/2 #2/3 40 = 4.

199

===== PAGE 219 =====

200 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

Meanwhile, from the point of view of Saturday, the utility of skipping the
cake is:

U%(d) = 1+ 1/2#2/3*6 =3.

From the point of view of Saturday, therefore, you will prefer to eat the
cake.

This example shows time inconsistency at work. Ahead of time, you prefer to
stick to your diet and resolve to refrain from having the cake. And yet, when
the opportunity arises, you prefer to ignore the diet and eat the cake. This
means that you are exhibiting impulsivity. If impulsivity is not familiar to
you, you belong to a small and lucky subsample of humanity. As the example
shows, you can be impulsive and impatient at the same time. The next exercise
illustrates the interaction between the two.

Exercise 9.4 Impulsivity and impatience Suppose you are offered the choice

between option a (8 utiles on Thursday) and b (12 utiles on Friday).

(a) Assume that 8 = 1 and that 6 = 5/6. From the point of view of Thursday,
which one would you choose? From the point of view of Wednesday,
which one would you choose?

(b) Assume that 8 = 1 and that 6 = 1/6. From the point of view of Thursday,

which one would you choose? From the point of view of Wednesday,

which one would you choose?

Assume that B = 1/2, and that 6 = 1. From the point of view of Thursday,

which one would you choose? From the point of view of Wednesday,

which one would you choose?

Assume that 6 = 1/2, and that 6 = 2/3. From the point of view of Thursday,

which one would you choose? From the point of view of Wednesday,

which one would you choose?

(c

nee

(d

—

Hyperbolic discounting can account not just for the fact that people
emphasize their present over their future well-being, but also that they
change their minds about how to balance the present versus the future. Thus,
it can account for the fact that people fully intend to diet, stop smoking, do
homework, and quit drugs, and then completely fail to do so. Here is another
example.

Exercise 9.5 Cancer screening Most colon cancers develop from polyps.
Because early screening can detect polyps before they become cancerous and
colon cancer in its early stages, many doctors advise patients over a certain
age to have a colonoscopy. Unfortunately, colonoscopies are experienced as
embarrassing and painful. The typical person, when young, resolves to have
a colonoscopy when older, but changes his or her mind as the procedure
approaches. Assume that two patients, Abelita and Benny, have the choice
between the following: (a) having a colonoscopy at time 1 (utility = 0) and
being healthy at time 2 (utility = 18); and (b) avoiding the colonoscopy at time
1 (utility = 6) and be unhealthy at time 2 (utility = 0).

===== PAGE 220 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice 201

Abelita discounts the future exponentially. Her 6 = 2/3.

(a) Att = 0: What is her utility of a? What is her utility of b?

(b) Att = 1: What is her utility of a? What is her utility of b?

Benny discounts the future hyperbolically. His B = 1/6 and his 6 = 1.
(c) Att = 0: What is his utility of a? What is his utility of b?

(d) Att = 1: What is his utility of a? What is his utility of b?

(e) Who acts more like the typical patient?

(f) Who is more likely to end up with health issues?

The beta-delta function also permits you to go the other way. Knowing a
person’s preferences, the function permits you to compute their beta and/or
delta. Consider the following exercise.

Exercise 9.6 Suppose that you discount the future hyperbolically, that is, in
accordance with the beta-delta function, and that from the point of view of
Thursday you are indifferent between options a (1 utile on Thursday) and b
(3 utiles on Friday).

(a) If 8 = 1/2, what is 6?

(b) If 8 = 4/9, what is B?

Exercise 9.7 Suppose that you discount the future hyperbolically. Assume
that both B and 6 are strictly greater than zero but strictly smaller than one. At
t = 0, you are given the choice between the following three options: a (1 utile
att = 0), b (2 utiles at t = 1), and c (3 utiles at f = 2). As a matter of fact, at t = 0
you are indifferent between a and b and between b and c.

(a) Compute f and 6.

(b) Suppose, in addition, that at f = 0 you are indifferent between c and d (x

utiles at t = 3). What is x?

Exercise 9.8 Suppose that you discount the future hyperbolically. Assume
that both B and 6 are strictly greater than zero but strictly smaller than one. At
t = 0, you are given the choice between the following three options: a (2 utiles
at f = 0), b (6 utiles at f = 1), and ¢ (10 utiles at ¢ = 2). As a matter of fact, att = 0
you are indifferent between a and b and between b and ¢. Compute @ and 6.

Exercise 9.9 Wicksteed’s blanket The theologian and economist Philip
Wicksteed offers the following observation: “[We] lie awake (or what we call
awake next morning) half the night consciously suffering from cold, when
even without getting out of bed we could reach a blanket or a rug which
would secure comfortable sleep for the rest of the night.” Suppose that staying ina freezing bed gives Wicksteed 1 utile now (t = 0), 1 utile in the middle
of the night (f = 1), and 1 utile in the early morning (f = 2). If he reached
for the blanket, he would suffer 0 utiles now but enjoy 5 utiles in the middle of the night and in the early morning. A patient man, Wicksteed might
have had a delta of one. What is his beta, given that he does not reach for the
blanket?

The next two sections contain more exercises on hyperbolic discounting.

===== PAGE 221 =====

202 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

9.3 Choosing not to choose

Another feature of human behavior is that we sometimes choose not to choose,
in the sense that we take action to prevent ourselves from taking action. As
recounted by Homer, Ulysses famously allowed himself to be tied to the mast
of his ship so that he could listen to the sweet but seductive song of the sirens
without risking doing anything stupid (see Figure 9.4). The rest of us are willing to pay a premium to buy snacks in small packages, soft drinks from overpriced vending machines, and beer in small quantities. Though we know that
we could save money by buying in bulk, we fear that doing so would lead to
overindulgence, leaving us fat, drunk, and no better off financially. In a wellknown study about procrastination and precommitment, executive-education
students were allowed to set their own deadlines for three required papers.
At the beginning of the term almost three-quarters, 73 percent, set deadlines
that fell before the last week of class, even though they knew missed deadlines would lead to lower grades. Apparently the students were so afraid they
would not get the work done without deadlines and external penalties that
they were willing to take the risk.

This kind of behavior is theoretically puzzling. From the point of view of
exponential discounting, choosing not to choose makes no sense. According
to this model, if you do not want to indulge now, you will not want to indulge
later either. But such behavior is not obviously entailed by the hyperbolic discounting model either. If you discount your future hyperbolically, you may
very well plan not to overindulge but then overindulge anyway. Thus, neither
one of the models that we have explored so far is appropriate for capturing
common behaviors such as those above.

im Figure 9.4 Ulysses and the Sirens. Detail of mosaic from Dougga, Tunisia.
9 a Photograph by Dennis Jarvis. Used with permission.

===== PAGE 222 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice

Behavioral economists approach the issue by drawing a distinction
between naive and sophisticated hyperbolic discounters. When people are
time inconsistent - meaning that they prefer x to y ahead of time, but y to x
when the time arrives — they are said to have self-control problems. Naive
time-inconsistent individuals — or naifs, for short — are unaware of their selfcontrol problems. Naifs make their choices based on the inaccurate assumption that their future preferences will be identical to their current preferences.
Sophisticated time-inconsistent individuals — or sophisticates, for short — are
aware of their self-control problems. Sophisticates make their choices based
on accurate predictions of their future behavior. An example might help.

It is October and you want to save for presents for the upcoming holiday
season. You know that saving in October and November allows you to get
some really nice presents for your loved ones in December. Saving and saving again is no fun, but your utility stream 3-3-27 ends on a high note when
friends and family open their presents and love you again. You can also save
in October, splurge in November, and still end up with decent presents in
December, for a utility stream of 3-9-15. It goes without saying that you can
just spend and spend, in which case your utility stream is 6-6-9. See Table
9.2(a) (ignoring the last line for now).

Table 9.2 Layaway payoff matrices

Oct Nov Dec Nov Dec
save—-save 3 3 27 save 3 27
save-spend 3 9 15 spend 9 15
spend-spend 6 6 9
layaway 2 3 27
(a) October (b) November

Let us first assume that you are an exponential discounter with d = 1. If so,
you will choose save-save:

U™(save-save) = 3+ 3+ 27 =33
U(save-spend) = 3 + 9+ 15 = 27
U°(spend-spend) = 6 +6+9=21

Let us now consider the possibility that you are a hyperbolic discounter with
@ = 1and B = 1/3. If so, you will also choose save-save:
U°"(save-save) = 3 + ¥/,(3 + 27) =13
U%(save-spend) = 3 + 1/,(9 + 15) =11
U°#(spend-spend) = 6 + 14(6 + 9) =11

So far so good.

203

===== PAGE 223 =====

204 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

The problem is that having saved in October, you may be tempted to splurge
in November; now you have savings, after all, that risk burning a hole in your
pocket. You can continue to save in November and enjoy the expected 3-27
utility stream. Or you can spend, in which case you get 9-15. See Table 9.2(b)
for the options available to you in November. The exponential discounter,
being time consistent, would of course continue to save:

U*(save) = 3 + 27 = 30
Ud*(spend) = 9 + 15 = 24

Ahyperbolic discounter, however, would spend:

UN(save) = 3 + % * 27 = 12
UN°(spend) = 9 + % #15 = 14

That is, come November, there is no way the hyperbolic discounter would
stay on the save-save path charted in October. An unsophisticated, or
naive, hyperbolic discounter is unable to anticipate his future behavior.
Thus, he will get on the wagon in October, choose save-save, but fall off it
and splurge in November; in spite of the very best intentions, therefore, he
will end up with save-spend. A sophisticated hyperbolic discounter is able
to anticipate her behavior and knows in October that save-save is not going
to happen. Having eliminated save-save from her menu, the sophisticate
might as well spend-spend, since she is indifferent between the remaining
two options.

This is bad news not only for the hyperbolic discounter but also for purveyors of expensive goods; if customers are unable to save for the fancy stuff,
nobody will be able to sell it. Department stores and other sellers therefore
have every incentive to offer a layaway plan: for a small administrative fee of
one, payable in October, stores will hold on to customers’ savings in November,
so as to make spending them then impossible. The fact that department stores
offer a layaway plan does not eliminate any of the other options available in
October; it merely adds one with a utility stream of 2-3-27, represented by the
last line in Table 9.2(a).

No exponential discounter would choose layaway, since U° (layaway)
= 2+ 3+ 27 = 32, which is inferior to save-save. For our hyperbolic discounter, the discounted utility would be U°"(layaway) = 2 + 14(3 + 27) =
12. The unsophisticated hyperbolic discounter, who evaluates the options
available in October without consideration of whether he can stick to the
plan in November, will note that save-save looks better than layaway and
choose save-save in October, fall off the wagon in November, and end up
with save-spend. The sophisticated hyperbolic discounter, who eliminates
save-save from her menu knowing that she will be unable to stick to it,
finds that layaway beats both save-spend and spend-spend. She signs up
for the layaway plan, is prevented from splurging in November, and gets
the nice presents in December. Notice that the introduction of layaway,
although inferior to save-save in terms of utilities, actually helps the

===== PAGE 224 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice

sophisticated hyperbolic discounter do better than she would have done
otherwise.

Here is another example of the behavior of an exponential discounter, a
naive hyperbolic discounter, and a sophisticated hyperbolic discounter.

Example 9.10 Johnny Depp 1 Your local cinema theater offers a mediocre
movie this week (u, = 3), a good movie next week (u, = 5), a great movie in
two weeks (u, = 8), and a fantastic Johnny Depp movie in three weeks (u,
= 13). Unfortunately, you must skip one of the four. For all questions below,
suppose that 6 = 1 and 6 = 1/2. Will you skip a the mediocre, b the good, ¢
the great, or d the fantastic movie?

If you are an exponential discounter, you will skip the worst movie. At
t = 0, you know that U°(a) = 5 + 8 + 13 = 26 is better than U°(b) = 3 + 8
+ 13 = 24, which is better than U°(c), and so on. Because you are an exponential discounter, and therefore time consistent, you stick to your plan.

If you are a naive hyperbolic discounter, you will procrastinate until the
very last moment and miss the fantastic movie. At t = 0, you choose between
U%(a) = “46 + 8 + 13) = 13, Ub) = 3 + 4B + 13) = 13.5, Wc) = 3 + KOE
+ 13) = 12, and Ud) = 3 + %(5 + 8) = 9.5. You watch the mediocre movie,
fully intending to skip the good one. But at f = 1, everything looks different.
From there, you no longer have the option to skip the mediocre movie. You
choose between U?(b) = 4(8 + 13) = 10.5, U(c) = 5 + %* 13 = 11.5, and U'(d)
=5+%*8 = 9. You watch the good movie, fully intending to skip the great
movie. At t = 2, though, you choose between U?(c) = % * 13 = 6.5 and U*(d)
= 8. Thus, you watch the great movie and at t = 3 have no choice but to skip
the fantastic movie.

If you are a sophisticated hyperbolic discounter, by contrast, you will skip
the good movie. Your sophistication allows you to predict that self-control
problems at t = 2 would prevent you from watching the fantastic movie.
Consequently, the choice at tf = 1 is between skipping the good movie for a
utility of U'(b) = 10.5 or else end up with U"(d) = 9. So you know att = 0 that
att = 1 you will choose b. At f = 0, therefore, the choice is between U°(a) = 13
and U®°(b) = 13.5. Thus, you will watch the mediocre movie, skip the good
one, and watch the great and fantastic ones.

This example shows how sophistication helps people anticipate the problems posed by time-inconsistent behavior. Behavior of this kind is probably
common. At night, many people are determined to get up early the next
morning, even though they anticipate that tomorrow morning they will
want to sleep late. In order to prevent their morning self from sleeping late,
therefore, they set alarms and put them on a window ledge across the room,
behind a cactus. There are alarms that, when they go off, roll off the bedside
table and under the bed or across the room, forcing your morning self to
get up and chase them down, by which time (the idea is) you will be too
awake to go back to bed. There are alarms that unless you get up and turn
them off promptly will start shredding money. If any of these techniques
sound familiar, you are a sophisticated hyperbolic discounter. Notice that

205

===== PAGE 225 =====

206 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

the demand for schemes such as layaway plans and devices such as rolling
alarm clocks shows not only that people exhibit time inconsistency, but also
that they are fairly sophisticated in anticipating and subverting their own
inconsistent behavior.

Bizarrely, however, sophistication can also exacerbate self-control problems. We have already come across one such case, namely, the sophisticated
hyperbolic discounter who having eliminated save-save decides that she
might as well spend-spend. She will therefore act even more myopically than
the unsophisticated hyperbolic discounter, who attempts to save-save and at
least ends up with save-spend. What follows is another, even more striking
example of this phenomenon.

Exercise 9.11 Johnny Depp 2 This exercise refers to Example 9.10. Suppose

instead that you can only watch one of the four movies. Will you watch a the

mediocre, b the good, c the great, or d the fantastic movie?

(a) Show that an exponential discounter will watch d the fantastic movie.

(b) Show that a naive hyperbolic discounter will watch c the great movie.

(c) Show that a sophisticated hyperbolic discounter will watch a the mediocre movie.

The problem is that sophisticated hyperbolic discounters tend to preproperate, that is, doing something now when it would be better to wait.
Preproperation in one sense is the very opposite of procrastination,
which is a problem that naive hyperbolic discounters have. Paradoxically,
then, there are situations in which naifs are better off than sophisticates.
Sometimes individuals who are well aware of their self-control problems
would do better if they did not try to anticipate their future behavior to the
extent that they do.

9.4 Preferences over profiles

The model of hyperbolic discounting, especially when augmented with a
story about naifs and sophisticates, can capture a number of phenomena that
are simply inconsistent with the model of exponential discounting. Yet, there
are many conditions under which both exponential and hyperbolic discounting fail to accurately capture people’s actual behavior. The following exercise
makes this clear.

Exercise 9.12 Cleaning the house It is Sunday morning (¢ = 0), and you
are determined to accomplish two things today: cleaning the apartment and
going to the movies. You can either clean during the morning (at t = 0), and
go to the movies during the afternoon (at t = 1) or go to the movies during the
morning (at t = 0) and clean in the afternoon (at t = 1). You hate cleaning: it
only gives you a utility of 2. You love the movies: it gives you as much as 12.

For the first two questions, assume that you discount the future exponentially with 6 = 1/2. From the point of view of t = 0:

===== PAGE 226 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice

(a) What is the utility of cleaning first and going to the movies later?
(b) What is the utility of going to the movies first and cleaning later?
For the last two questions, assume that you discount the future hyperbolically with B = 1/3 and 6 = 1/2. From the point of view of t = 0:
(c) What is the utility of cleaning first and going to the movies later?
(d) What is the utility of going to the movies first and cleaning later?

What this exercise suggests is that whether you discount the future exponentially or hyperbolically, you will always schedule the pleasant experience first
and the unpleasant one later.

This implication contrasts sharply with people’s observed behavior.
Personal experience suggests that, when choosing between sequences of
events, people will make a point of scheduling the unpleasant experience first
and the pleasant one later. “We must try to make the latter part of the journey
better than the first, so long as we are en route,” as the ancient Greek philosopher Epicurus said. In this case, personal experience and ancient wisdom are
supported by evidence. In one study, the researchers presented people with
verbal descriptions and graphical representations of increasing and decreasing salary profiles, and elicited preferences over the profiles. The authors conclude that all things equal, by and large, a large majority of workers prefer
increasing wage profiles over flat or decreasing ones.

Such a preference for increasing utility profiles could in principle be
captured by relaxing the assumption (which we made tentatively in Chapter
8) that 6 is less than one. If 6 exceeds one, a rational discounter will postpone pleasant events as much as possible. When 6 > 1, it follows that r < 0,
which is why the resulting preference is called negative time preference.
Yet, this solution is awkward, because the very same people who clean in
the morning and go to the movies in the afternoon simultaneously discount
the future with 6 < 1 and r > 0 (that is, exhibit positive time preference) in
other contexts.

In addition, there is evidence that people also exhibit a preference for
spread. That is, people sometimes like to distribute multiple desirable events
over time. While some children eat all their Halloween candy in one sitting,
others prefer to distribute the eating evenly over days or weeks. This kind of
preference cannot be accounted for either by positive or negative time preference. Finally, people often exhibit a preference for variation over time, as they
avoid choosing to consume the same good over and over again. “Variation
in everything is sweet,” the ancient Greek poet Euripides wrote. As a result,
people diversify over time. (We will return to the theme of diversification in
the next section.)

All this suggests that people have preferences over profiles: they care
about the shape of the utility stream as well as about (discounted) individual
utilities. People often save the best for last: perhaps they want to end ona high
note, hope to get the unpleasant experience over with, or rely on the prospect
of a pleasant experience to motivate themselves to take care of the unpleasant
one. People also wish to distribute pleasant and unpleasant events over time
and they value variety. Such preferences over profiles cannot be captured in

207

===== PAGE 227 =====

208 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

the context of either one of the discounting models we have discussed so far.
Yet preferences over profiles seem to be an important phenomenon.

Example 9.13 Economics professors Rumor has it that even economics professors frequently elect to receive their annual salary in twelve rather than
nine installments, even though they would maximize their discounted utility
by asking to be paid in nine. Obviously, they have the option of saving some
of their money to smooth out consumption. A preference for a smooth income
profile would explain this phenomenon.

The shape of utility profiles has received a lot of attention in the literature on
the peak—end rule, which is used to assess the desirability of utility streams or
“episodes.” When people follow this rule, they consciously or unconsciously
rank utility streams based on the average of the peak (that is, the maximum
utility during the episode) and the end (that is, the utility near the end of the
episode) and choose accordingly. Insofar as people act in accordance with the
peak-—end rule, the shape of the utility profile — and not just the (discounted)
sum of utilities — will be critically important.

The peak-end rule has some interesting implications. Consider Figure 9.5.
A person who applies the peak-end rule will assess episode (a) as superior

u(x)
10

(a)

u(x)

(b)

| Figure 9.5 | The peak-end rule

===== PAGE 228 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice

to episode (b). If this is not immediately obvious, notice that the peak utility
of the two episodes is identical and that episode (a) has a higher end utility
than episode (b). If you apply the peak-end rule to make the choice between.
(a) and (b), therefore, you will choose (a). But there is something odd about
this ranking: episode (b) has all the utility of episode (a) and then some. The
peak-end rule entails duration neglect, meaning that the length of an episode
will be relatively unimportant, contrary to exponential and hyperbolic discounting models.

Would anyone apply the peak—end rule? In a famous study of patients
undergoing a colonoscopy — as in Exercise 9.5 — the researchers confirmed that
retrospective evaluations reflect the peak and end utility and that the length
of the episode was relatively unimportant. Bizarrely, adding a painful tail to an
already painful episode made people think of the episode as a whole as less
painful and therefore more desirable.

Exercise 9.14 The peak—-end rule Suppose you add a pleasant tail to an
already pleasant episode. If people assess the episode as a whole in accordance with the peak-end rule, will this make people think of the episode as a
whole as more or less pleasant?

Exercise 9.15 The peak-end rule, cont. This exercise refers to Figure 9.6.
Would a person who follows the peak-end rule choose the episode represented by the solid line or the episode represented by the dashed line?

The peak-end rule can perhaps explain why people keep having children,
even though systematic data suggest that parents are on the average less
happy than non-parents, and that parents on the average are less happy when.
taking care of their children than when they are engaged in many other activities. As long as the most intense joy generated by children exceeds the most
intense joy from other sources, and holding end experience constant, people
will rank having children above other experiences. Duration neglect entails
that long sleepless nights and the like will be relatively unimportant in the
final analysis.

u(x)
10

| Figure 9.6 | eRe The peak-end rule, cont.

209

===== PAGE 229 =====

210 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

Exercise 9.16 College Many adults will tell you that their college years were
the best years of their lives. This is puzzling since actual college students are
not, on the average, fantastically happy. Use the concept of the peak-end rule
to explain why people remember their college years so fondly.

There are choices that superficially look as if they must be the result of a preference over profiles but that really are not. For one thing, insofar as the anticipation of a pleasant event is itself pleasurable, you can rationally postpone the
pleasant event. Suppose that it is Saturday, and that you are choosing whether
to eat candy today or tomorrow. If you eat it today, you get 6 utiles today and
0 utiles tomorrow; if you postpone eating it until tomorrow, you get 2 utiles
today (from the anticipation of the pleasant event) and 6 tomorrow (from the
pleasant event itself). Given this sort of scenario, a rational discounter can
postpone the eating of the candy until Sunday, even if he or she discounts
the future somewhat. And this kind of narrative is consistent with standard
theory.

9.5 Misprediction and miswanting

Implicit throughout this chapter and the last is the idea that many decisions
depend on predictions of future preferences. When we go grocery shopping,
we need to be mindful not only of the preferences we have when doing the
shopping, but of the preferences that we will have when it is time to prepare
and eat the food. When we choose a course of study, we have to consider the
desires we will have while pursuing the degree, but also those we will have on
the job for the rest of our careers. When we deliberate about whether to form
a family and have children, we cannot ignore the preferences we will have 20,
40, or 60 years hence. And if we are time inconsistent and sophisticated about
it, we have to anticipate how our preferences will change over time — or else
we will not be able to choose not to choose as outlined in Section 9.3.

As it turns out, people are not able to predict their future preferences
all that well. This fact should not be surprising. Many of the behavior patterns we have discussed in this book are surprising to social scientists and
lay people alike. Consequently, there is little reason to think that a random
decision-maker would be aware of them. Behavioral economists have identified a number of different ways in which people’s predictions about their own
preferences are systematically off target.

Underprediction of adaptation A number of studies suggest that people fail
to appreciate the extent to which they will adapt to new conditions, such as a
new endowment (see Section 3.5). Thus, people are unable to predict, ahead of
time, just how attached they will be to an object after it has been incorporated
in their endowment and loss aversion kicks in. In one study, participants who
did not currently have a branded coffee cup reported that, if they had one,
they would be willing to sell it for between $3 and $4; once they were awarded
one, they said they would need between $4 and $6 to give it up.

===== PAGE 230 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice

Underprediction of adaptation helps explain marketing practices such as
the no-questions-asked return policy from Section 3.5. If people underpredict
the extent to which their preferences will change once some good has been
incorporated into their endowment, they will underestimate the difficulties
associated with returning the good once it has been brought home, and consequently help make the policy an effective tool for sellers.

Diversification bias Meanwhile, people often overestimate the degree to
which their future selves will enjoy variety over time. In a famous study,
undergraduate students were offered a choice of snacks to be delivered at the
end of class on three subsequent class meetings over the course of as many
weeks. When participants made separate choices on each of the three occasions, only 9 percent chose three different snacks. By contrast, when participants had to make all three choices during the first class meeting, 64 percent
chose three different snacks. Such results suggest that people exaggerate the
degree to which their future selves will favor variety and consequently diversify too much. Maybe variety in everything really is sweet — but not, apparently, as sweet as we think.

Projection bias You are probably familiar with projection: roughly, the
unconscious process of attributing to others features of one’s self. Projection
bias is based on the idea that people project their current preferences onto
their future selves. As a result, they will behave as though their future preferences are more like their current preferences than they actually are. The
cliché according to which you should never go grocery shopping when
extremely hungry or extremely full embodies the insight: when we are
extremely hungry, we overestimate how much we will want to eat under
more normal circumstances, and when we are extremely full, we underestimate it.

Another famous study asked office workers to choose between healthy
and unhealthy snacks that would be delivered either at a time when they
could expect to be hungry (late in the afternoon) or satiated (immediately after
lunch). Some made the choice right after lunch; some in the late afternoon.
Those who were scheduled to receive the snack at a time when they were
likely to be hungry were more likely to opt for the unhealthy snack, presumably reflecting an increased taste for unhealthy snacks when hungry. However,
those who were hungry when they made the decision were more likely to opt
for unhealthy snacks than those who were satiated. Consistent with projection
bias, people who were hungry when they made the decision acted as though
they anticipated being more hungry when they actually received the snack a
week later — like they would if they projected their current hunger onto their
future self.

Example 9.17 Fasting Some religious traditions encourage fasting as a way
to identify with less fortunate fellow human beings. The underlying insight is
consistent with projection bias: it is only when we ourselves are hungry that
we can begin to appreciate what it is like to actually starve.

211

===== PAGE 231 =====

212 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

Projection bias can explain underprediction of adaptation: we underestimate
the extent to which our preferences will change after we incorporate something into our endowment and loss aversion kicks in.

Hot-cold empathy gaps The term “hot-cold empathy gap” refers to our inability when in a “hot” emotional state to empathize with people (ourselves or
others) when in a “cold” state, and vice versa. The result is that when we are
in a hot state — whether we are experiencing hunger, thirst, anger, embarrassment, or sexual arousal — we tend to underestimate how different our preferences are when we are in a cold state, and the other way around. Hot-cold
empathy gaps occur both prospectively and retrospectively, and also across
individuals. Empathy gaps are a direct result of projection bias.

One pioneering study found that sexual arousal dramatically increased
college-aged males’ reported willingness to engage in immoral and risky sexual behavior. Researchers compared students’ answers to questions such as
“Would you keep trying to have sex after your date says ‘no’ ?” and “Would
you always use a condom if you didn’t know the sexual history of a new
sexual partner?” when in a normal (presumably not aroused) and in a sexually aroused state (while masturbating). The results suggest that young men
when in a cold state underestimate how willing they are, when in a hot state,
to engage in immoral and risky sexual behavior. As the authors put it: “people
seem to have only limited insight into the impact of sexual arousal on their
own judgments and behavior” — which is important not the least from a prevention standpoint.

Miswanting Many of our preferences are based on affective forecasts: predictions of how we would feel under various circumstances. For example, it is
not uncommon to form preferences over careers, spouses, cars, or whatever
based on predictions of how happy we would be if we had this or did that.
Unfortunately, there is sometimes a mismatch between wanting and liking
— between what we want because we think that we will like it when we get
it and what we in fact like when we get it. When this happens, we are victims of miswanting. A major source of miswanting is impact bias: the tendency to overestimate the enduring impact of future events on our emotional
lives. While many of us imagine that winning a million dollars would make
us lastingly happy and becoming paraplegic lastingly sad, research suggests
that both lottery winners and paraplegics return close to baseline happiness
levels surprisingly soon. Similarly, marriage, divorce, fame, and fortune have
a much smaller effect on our emotional lives, including our happiness, than
people tend to imagine.

Impact bias may be driven in part by underprediction of adaptation: part
of the story, certainly, is that lottery winners, paraplegics, and everybody else
adapt to changing conditions to a much greater degree, and sooner, than they
anticipate. Another source of miswanting is the focusing illusion: the tendency for whatever you are attending to to seem more important than it is.
A person thinking about money, or a new car, or a bigger house, is likely to
overestimate the emotional impact of getting more money, a new car, or a

===== PAGE 232 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice

bigger house. But as Kahneman puts it: “Nothing in life is as important as you
think it is when you are thinking about it.”

Exercise 9.18 Sidgwick What kind of misprediction is described in the
following passage, by the nineteenth-century moral philosopher Henry
Sidgwick?
In estimating for practical purposes the value of different pleasures open to us, we
commonly trust most to our prospective imagination: we project ourselves into the
future, and imagine what a particular pleasure will amount to under hypothetical
circumstances. This imagination seems to be chiefly determined by our experience
of past pleasures ... but partly also by the state of our mind or nerves at the time.

Exercise 9.19 Buffet lines Perhaps you too have the following experience
when picking up dinner from a buffet, where you can serve yourself exactly
what kind of food you want. At the end of the meal, people find there is food
on their plate they have no interest in eating. This is puzzling: if people were
able to correctly predict their preferences, all the food would get eaten. Use
the concepts of (a) diversification bias, (b) projection bias, and (c) hot-cold
empathy gaps to explain how a person can choose food he or she will later
have no interest in eating.

Systematic misprediction and miswanting have many adverse consequences.
The phenomena discussed in this section make us strangers to ourselves, in
that they may leave us shocked and surprised at the bizarre tastes of the
person we thought we knew the best - namely, ourselves. To the extent that
the right decision depends on accurate predictions, moreover, misprediction
and miswanting can lead to bad decisions — even by our own lights. Impact
bias and the focusing illusion, for example, can make us overestimate the
degree to which wealth will allow us to satisfy our preferences, as a result
of which we risk working too much and spending too little time with family
and friends.

Then again, Adam Smith believed that exactly this kind of mistake is a
driver of economic progress. Smith describes a “poor man’s son, whom
heaven in its anger has visited with ambition,” and who imagines that great
wealth will lead to great happiness. Only in “the last dregs of life,” Smith continues, does he learn that the pursuit is all in vain and wealth and greatness
mere “trinkets of frivolous utility.” But here is the kicker:

And it is well that nature imposes upon us in this manner. It is this deception which
rouses and keeps in continual motion the industry of mankind. It is this which first
prompted them to cultivate the ground, to build houses, to found cities and commonwealths, and to invent and improve all the sciences and arts, which ennoble
and embellish human life.

As if “by an invisible hand,” Smith concludes, the poor man’s pursuit for
wealth and greatness, though misguided, ends up promoting the greater good.

If you want to avoid misprediction and miswanting, Sidgwick proposed.
keeping close tabs on your and others’ emotional reactions. He advocated
what he called the empirical-reflective method:

213

===== PAGE 233 =====

214 Part 4

Intertemporal Choice

[We] must substitute for the instinctive, implicit inference just described a more scientific process of reasoning: by deducing the probable degree of our future pleasure
or pain under any circumstances from inductive generalizations based on a sufficient number of careful observations of our own and others’ experience.

Sidgwick’s empirical—reflective method has recently been endorsed by leading psychologists, although they do not call it that. Sonja Lyubomirsky, for
example, says we should “shelve” our gut reactions and instead systematically think things through based on our own and other people’s experiences.
Gilbert has even suggested that we refrain from trying to imagine what doing
something will be like, for us, before we do it. He believes we can make far
more accurate predictions by simply asking somebody else who is currently
doing that thing to report what it feels like in the present. If you want to know
what it is like to have children (cf. Exercise 6.43 on page 150), he believes you
should not try to imagine what it would be like, for you, to have children; you
should ask people who have children what it is like for them right now. You
might, for example, just ask your parents, if they are still alive. That is probably the last piece of advice many people want to hear, but Gilbert swears by it.

Table 9.3 The happiest and unhappiest jobs of 2015

Happiest Unhappiest
Principal Security guard
Executive chef Merchandiser
Loan officer Salesperson

Automation engineer Dispatcher

a FF WN

Research assistant Clerk

Exercise 9.20 Happiest professions Table 9.3 shows the result of a recent
survey about the happiness of people in various professions: the middle column lists the five happiest professions, and the right-hand column the five
unhappiest. You might think that you would be happiest if you were a lawyer
or a doctor or something. Although he (probably) does not know you, Gilbert
thinks you are wrong. What profession does he think would make you the
happiest? Explain why he believes that he knows more about how happy you
would be in each of the professions than you do.

9.6 Discussion

In this chapter, we have discussed the manner in which people make choices
when time is a factor. We discovered several phenomena that are difficult
to reconcile with the model of exponential discounting which we explored
in Chapter 8. For many of these phenomena, the divergence appears significant and systematic, and therefore predictable. Again, knowledge of
these phenomena permits us not only to explain and predict other people’s

===== PAGE 234 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice

behavior, but also to influence it, and to resist other people’s efforts to influence ours.

There are many other phenomena that are at odds with the exponential
discounting model we learned in Section 8.3. The sign effect says that gains
are discounted at a higher rate than losses. The magnitude effect says that
large outcomes are discounted at a lower rate than small ones. Consider also
the likelihood that preferences change as a result of becoming sleepy, hungry,
thirsty, excited, or old. Such changes are important not just because they mean.
that people’s behavior can be expected to change over time in predictable
ways, but also because people can be expected to respond to their own predictions about how their preferences will change. For example, many people
know that they will buy too much food when shopping on an empty stomach
and try to modulate their behavior accordingly. Economists have built models
in which preference change is endogenous, but it may be more parsimonious
to postulate the existence of a preference relation that evolves over time.

Behavioral economists take these phenomena to provide evidence that the
exponential-discounting model and the assumption of stable preferences are
descriptively inadequate. Some of these phenomena also cast doubt on the normative correctness of the model. It is true that some violations of exponential
discounting — involving serious procrastination, extreme impulsivity, or similar — can harm the individual. While some degree of sophistication can help
mitigate the effects of hyperbolic discounting, it can also hurt, as Exercise 9.11
showed. But then, there is real disagreement about the rationality of time discounting (see Section 8.4). The discussion about utility profiles in the previous
section helps underscore these concerns. It can be argued that it is perfectly
rational to desire a life of increasing utility, of ups-and-downs, or any other
shape of the utility profile. If so, models of exponential and hyperbolic discounting both fail as a normative standard. And if exponential discounting is not the
uniquely rational way to assess deferred outcomes, this would put in question
its widespread use in disciplines such as cost-benefit analysis and finance.

In Part 5 we will consider strategic interaction, which will add yet another
layer of complexity to the analysis.

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 9.21 Retirement savings When young, many people fully
intend to save for retirement. However, when they start making money
after college, they are often tempted to spend it immediately. Assume
that Ximena and Yves have the choice between the following two options:
(a) saving for retirement at time 1 (u, = 0) and retiring in style at time
2 (u, = 12); and (b) having more disposable income at time 1 (u, = 6)
and retiring poor at time 2 (u, = 0).
Ximena is an exponential discounter. Her 6 = 2/3.
(a) Att = 0: What is her utility of a? What is her utility of b?
(b) Att = 1: What is her utility of a? What is her utility of b?

215

===== PAGE 235 =====

216 Part4 Intertemporal Choice

|| ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

Yves is a naive hyperbolic discounter. His 8B = 1/3 and his 6 = 1.
(c) Att = 0: What is his utility of a? What is his utility of b?

(d) Att = 1: What is his utility of a? What is his utility of b?

(e) Who is more likely to experience regret?

(f) Who is more likely to retire in style?

Exercise 9.22 Addiction Suppose that life has three periods: youth,
middle age, and old age. In every period you decide whether to do drugs
(“hit”) or not (“refrain”). The utility of hitting depends on whether you
are addicted (“hooked”) or not. If you are not hooked, the utility from
hitting is 10 and the utility from refraining is 0. If you are hooked, the
utility from hitting is -8 and the utility from refraining -25. In youth,
you are not hooked; after that, you are hooked just in case you hit in
the preceding period. Assume 4 =1 and B=1/2. What do you do if you
are (a) time consistent, (b) time-inconsistent and naive, and (c) timeinconsistent and sophisticated?

Exercise 9.23 Weights and shackles Seneca offered the following
advice:

[Reflect] that prisoners at first find the weights and shackles on their legs
hard to bear, but subsequently, once they have determined to endure them
rather than chafe against them, necessity teaches them to bear them bravely,
habit to bear them easily. In whatever life you choose you will find there are
delights and relaxations and pleasures, if you are willing to regard your evils
as light rather than to make them objects of hatred. In no respect has Nature
done us a greater service, who, as she knew into what tribulations we were
born, devised habit as a means of alleviating disasters, swiftly making us
grow accustomed to the worst sufferings.

This passage suggests Seneca was well aware of at least one phenomenon discussed in Section 9.5. Which one?

Exercise 9.24 Match each of the vignettes below with one of the following phenomena: hyperbolic discounting, preference over profiles, and
choosing not to choose. If in doubt, pick the best fit.

(a) Allie goes to bed at night fully intending to get up at 5 am and study
hard before noon. When the alarm goes off, she smacks it hard and
goes straight back to sleep.

(b) Bert wants to save more, but simply does not feel that he has enough
money left at the end of the month. To encourage himself to save,
he sets up an automatic transfer — on the first of each month — from
his checking account to a savings account from which withdrawing
money is a pain.

(c) Cherry can only afford a really nice meal at a restaurant once every
semester. She makes sure to schedule it at the very end of the semester, so that she has something to look forward to when eating her
Ramen noodles.

===== PAGE 236 =====

Chapter 9 Intertemporal Choice

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES cont.

(d) Darius knows that his wife would be so much happier, and his marriage so much healthier, if he spent more time cleaning the house. He
keeps thinking that it would be great to clean the house. Yet, when
it comes down to it, there is always something on TV that prevents
him from doing his part.

(e) Epicurus, or one of his followers, wrote: “Life is ruined by procrastination, and every one of us dies deep in his affairs.”

(f)} Unlike some people she knows, Filippa will not finish a whole tub

of ice-cream in one sitting. Rather, she will allow herself exactly one

spoonful every day.

A website helps you pursue to your goals by requesting your credit-

card number and the name of the non-profit organization you find

most odious. If you fail to reach whatever goals you set for yourself,
it will charge your card and send the money to the non-profit you
despise.

As Henry Sidgwick wrote: “In fact there is scarcely any point upon

which moralizers have dwelt with more emphasis than this, that

man’s forecast of pleasure is continually erroneous.”

~

(g

(h

=

Problem 9.25 Drawing on your own experience, make up stories like
those in Exercise 9.24 to illustrate the various ideas that you have read about
in this chapter.

FURTHER READING

The quotation from Junky at the beginning of Section 9.2 is from Burroughs (1977
[1953], p. xv). A helpful review of violations of the exponential discounting model

is Frederick et al. (2002), reprinted as Chapter 1 of Loewenstein et al. (2003). The
hyperbolic discounting model is due to Ainslie (1975); Obfomov is Goncharov (1915
[1859], p. 7) and Wicksteed (2003 [1933], pp. 29-30) describes the blanket-related
dilemma. Naive versus sophisticated hyperbolic discounting is discussed in O'Donoghue
and Rabin (2000), from which the Johnny Depp-related example and exercise were
adapted (pp. 237-8). The study of procrastination and precommitment is Ariely and
Wertenbroch (2002), and the layaway example was inspired by Tabarrok (2013). The
advice about making the latter part of the journey better than the first appears in Epicurus
(2012 [¢ 300 BCE], p. 182) and the study of workers’ preferences is Loewenstein and
Sicherman (1991); the line from Euripides is cited in Aristotle (1999 [¢ 350 BCE], p. 119).
The peak—end rule is discussed in Kahneman et al. (1997) and the colonoscopy study

in Redelmeier and Kahneman (1996). Loewenstein and Angner (2003) examine preference change from a descriptive and normative perspective. The data in Section 9.5 come
from Loewenstein and Adler (1995) on underprediction of adaptation, Simonson (1990)
on diversification bias, Read and van Leeuwen (1998) on projection bias, and Ariely

and Loewenstein (2006) on hot-cold empathy gaps (the conclusion cited appears on
page 95). Gilbert et al. (2002) explain impact bias and Kahneman (2011, pp. 402-406)
the focusing illusion. Sidgwick (2012 [1874]) appears to have discovered projection

===== PAGE 237 =====

218 Part4 Intertemporal Choice

bias (p. 121) and named and described the empirical—reflective method (p. 111, 122);
Lyubomirsky (2013, p. 11) and Gilbert (2006, Ch. 11) endorse something similar. Smith
(2002 [1759], pp. 214-15) said, “it is well that nature imposes upon us in this manner.” The data on the happiest and unhappiest professions appear in Adams (2015). The
addiction example is due to O’Donoghue and Rabin (2000, p. 240-1); Seneca (2007

[c 49], pp. 127-8) offered advice; Epicurus (2012 [¢ 300 BCE], p. 181) claims life is
ruined by procrastination; and Sidgwick (2012 [1874], p. 121) discusses “man’s forecast
of pleasure.”

===== PAGE 238 =====

PART

Strategic
Interaction

10 Analytical Game Theory

10.1 Introduction

10.2 Nash equilibrium in pure strategies
10.3 Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies
10.4 Equilibrium refinements

10.5 Discussion

11 Behavioral Game Theory

11.1 Introduction

11.2 Social preferences: Altruism, envy, fairness,
and justice

11.3 Intentions, reciprocity, and trust

11.4 Limited strategic thinking

11.5 Discussion

===== PAGE 239 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 240 =====

CHAPTER

Analytical Game
Theory l QO

10.1 Introduction

So far, we have assumed that the outcomes that you enjoy or suffer are determined jointly by your choices and the state of the world, which may be
unknown to you at the time of the decision. For many real-time decisions,
however, this is far from the whole story. Instead, many of the decision problems that you face in real life have an interactive or strategic nature. This means
that whatever happens depends not just on what you do but also on what
other people do. If you play chess, whether you win or lose is determined
not just by what you do but also by what your opponent does. If you invest
in stock, whether or not you make money depends not only on your choice of
stock but also on whether the stock goes up or down. And that is a function of
supply and demand, which is a function of whether other people buy or sell
the stock.

The presence of strategic interaction adds a whole new layer of complexity to the analysis. If you are a defense attorney, the outcome of your case
depends not only on your actions but on the actions of the prosecutor. Since
you are well aware of this, you do your best to anticipate her decisions. Thus,
your decisions will depend on what you think her decisions will be. Her decisions will reflect, in part, what she thinks you will do. So your decisions will
depend on what you think she thinks you will do. But what she thinks you
will do depends in part on what she thinks you think she will do ... and so
on. It is obvious that the correct analysis of strategic interaction is not obvious
at all.

The analysis of strategic interaction is the province of game theory. In this
chapter, I offer a brief overview of the standard theory, sometimes referred to
as analytical game theory.

10.2 Nash equilibrium in pure strategies

The following story is a true internet legend.

Example 10.1 The makeup exam One year there were two students taking
Chemistry. They both did so well on quizzes, midterms, and labs that they
decided to leave town and go partying the weekend before the exam. They
mightily enjoyed themselves. However, much like a scene in The Hangover:
Part IH, they overslept and did not make it back to campus in time for
the exam.

===== PAGE 241 =====

222 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

So they called their professor to say that they had got a flat tire on the way
to the exam, did not have a spare, and had to wait for a long time. The professor thought about it for a moment, and then said that he was glad to give them
a makeup exam the next day. The two friends studied all night.

At the assigned time, the professor placed them in separate rooms, handed
them the exams, and asked them to begin. The two friends looked at the first
problem, which was a simple one about molarity and solutions and was worth
5 points. “Easy!” they thought to themselves. Then, they turned the page and
saw the second question: “(95 points) Which tire?”

This example illustrates the interactive or strategic nature of many decision
problems. Here, the final grade of either friend will depend not just on his
answer to the question, but on the other friend’s answer too. The two will get
As whenever they give the same answer to the question and Fs whenever they
do not.

More formally speaking, you are playing a game whenever you face a decision problem in which the final outcome depends not just on your action, and on
whatever state of the world obtains, but also on the actions of at least one other
agent. According to this definition, the two friends are in fact playing a game
against each other. And this is true whether or not they think of it as a game.
Notice that you can play a game in this sense without competing against each
other. Here, the name of the game is cooperation — and coordination. The agents
involved in games are called players. A strategy is a complete plan of action that
describes what a player will do under all possible circumstances. In the case of
the makeup exam, each friend has four strategies to choose from: he can write
“Front Left (FL),” “Front Right (FR),” “Rear Left (RL),” or “Rear Right (RR).”

Given a number of players, a set of strategies available to each player, and
a set of payoffs (rewards or punishments) corresponding to each possible
combination of strategies, a game can be represented using a payoff matrix.
A payoff matrix is a table representing the payoffs of the players for each possible combination of strategies. The payoff matrix of the game played by the
two friends can be represented as in Table 10.1. A strategy profile is a vector
of strategies, one for each player. (FL, RR) is a strategy profile; so is (RL, RL).
Thus, the payoff matrix shows the payoffs resulting from each strategy profile. Of course, the payoff matrix looks much like the tables representing nonstrategic decision problems, except for the fact that each column represents a
choice by the other player rather than a state of the world.

Table 10.1 The makeup exam

FL A F F F
FR F A F F
RL F F A F
RR F F F A

===== PAGE 242 =====

Chapter 10 Analytical Game Theory

Analytical game theory is built around the concept of an equilibrium. The
most prominent equilibrium concept is that of Nash equilibrium.

Definition 10.2 Nash equilibrium A Nash equilibrium is a strategy profile such
that each strategy in the profile is a best response to the other strategies in the profile.

In the makeup-exam game from Example 10.1, (FL, FL) is a Nash equilibrium:
given that Player I plays FL, FL is a best response for Player II, and given that
Player II plays FL, FL is a best response for Player I. In equilibrium, given
the other players’ strategies, no one player can improve his or her payoff by
unilaterally changing to another strategy. By contrast, (FL, RR) is not a Nash
equilibrium: given that Player I plays FL, Player II can do better than playing
RR, and given that Player II plays RR, Player I can do better than playing FL.
In this section, we will limit our analysis to Nash equilibria in pure strategies:
Nash equilibria in which each player simply plays one of the individual strategies available to him or her (compare Section 10.3). In all, there are four Nash
equilibria in pure strategies, one for each tire.

Example 10.3 Coffee shops You and your study partner are planning to
meet at noon at one of two coffee shops, Lucy’s Coffee and Crestwood Coffee.
Unfortunately, you failed to specify which one, and you have no way of getting in touch with each other before noon. If you manage to meet, you get a
utility of 1; otherwise, you get a utility of 0. Draw the payoff matrix and find
the Nash equilibria in pure strategies.

The payoff matrix is Table 10.2. The convention is for the first number in
each cell to represent the payoff of Player I, whose strategies are listed in the
left-most column; the second number in each cell represents the payoff of
Player II, whose strategies are listed in the top row. The Nash equilibria in
pure strategies are (Lucy’s, Lucy’s) and (Crestwood, Crestwood).

Table 10.2 A pure coordination game

Lucy’s Crestwood
Lucy’s 1,1 0,0
Crestwood 0,0 11

The coffee-shop game is an example of a pure coordination game: a game in
which the players’ interests are perfectly aligned. The makeup-exam game,
obviously, is also a pure coordination game. In some coordination games,
however, interests fail to align perfectly. The point is typically made by means
of the politically-incorrectly named battle of the sexes.

Example 10.4 Battle of the sexes A husband and wife must decide whether
to have dinner at the steak house or at the crab shack. All things equal, both
would rather dine together than alone, but the man (Player I) prefers the steak
house and the woman (Player II) prefers the crab shack. The man gets 2 units
of utility if both dine at the steak house, 1 if both dine at the crab shack, and
0 if they dine apart; the woman gets 2 units of utility if both dine at the crab

223

===== PAGE 243 =====

224 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

shack, 1 if both dine at the steak house, and 0 if they dine apart. Draw the
payoff matrix and find the Nash equilibria in pure strategies.

The payoff matrix is Table 10.3. There are two Nash equilibria in pure strategies. (Steak House, Steak House) is one. Because this is Player I’s best outcome, he cannot improve his payoff by changing strategies. Although Player IT
would prefer it if both switched to Crab Shack, she cannot improve her payoff
by unilaterally deviating: if she plays Crab Shack when Player I plays Steak
House, she will end up with a payoff of 0 rather than 1. Of course (Crab Shack,
Crab Shack) is the other Nash equilibrium in pure strategies.

Table 10.3 An impure coordination game
Steak House Crab Shack

Steak House 2,1 0,0
Crab Shack 0,0 1,2

Because Player I prefers the one equilibrium and Player II prefers the other,
the battle of the sexes, sometimes euphemistically called “Bach or Stravinsky,”
is an example of an impure coordination game. Here are some exercises.

Exercise 10.5 Nash equilibrium in pure strategies Find all Nash equilibria
in the games in Table 10.4, where Player I chooses between Up (U), (Middle
(M)), and Down (D) and Player II chooses between Left (L), (Middle (M)), and
Right (R).

Table 10.4 Nash equilibrium exercises

L R L R L M R

U 2,2 0,0 U 5,1 2,0 U 6,2 5,1 43
D 0,0 11 D 5,1 1,2 M 3,6 84 2,1
D 28 9,6 3,0

(a) (b) (©)

Notice that in Exercise 10.5(a), there are two Nash equilibria in pure strategies,
though one is clearly inferior to the other from the point of view of both players. In Exercise 10.5(b), (U, L) and {D, L) are not both Nash equilibria although
they are “just as good” in the sense that they lead to the same payoffs. And in
Exercise 10.5(c), there are outcomes that are better for both players than the
Nash equilibrium.

As these games illustrate, there is no straightforward connection between
Nash equilibria and “best” outcomes for the players. As a result, it would
be a mistake to try to identify the former by searching for the latter. An even
more striking example of the general phenomenon is the prisoners’ dilemma
(Figure 10.1).

Example 10.6 Prisoners’ dilemma Two criminals are arrested on suspicion of
two separate crimes. The prosecutor has sufficient evidence to convict the two

===== PAGE 244 =====

Chapter 10 Analytical Game Theory

The suspects. Illustration by Cody Taylor

on the minor charge, but not on the major one. If the two criminals cooperate
(C) with each other and stay mum, they will be convicted on the minor charge
and serve two years in jail. After separating the prisoners, the prosecutor offers
each of them a reduced sentence if they defect (D), that is, testify against each
other. If one prisoner defects but the other one cooperates, the defector goes
free whereas the cooperator serves 20 years in jail. If both defect, both get convicted on the major charge but (as a reward for testifying) only serve ten years.
Assume that each prisoner cares about nothing but the number of years he
himself spends in jail. What is the payoff matrix? What is the Nash equilibrium?

The payoff matrix in terms of jail sentences is Table 10.5(a); in terms of
utilities, the payoff matrix can be represented as Table 10.5(b). Let us consider Player I first. If Player II cooperates, Player I has the choice between
cooperating and defecting; by defecting, he can go free instead of serving two
years in jail. If Player II defects, Player I still has the choice between cooperating and defecting; by defecting, he can serve 10 instead of 20 years in jail. In
brief, Player I is better off defecting no matter what Player II does. But the
same thing is true for Player II. Thus, there is only one Nash equilibrium. Both
defect and serve 10 years in jail.

Table 10.5 The prisoners’ dilemma

Cc D c D
c 2 years,2 years 20 years, 0 years c 33 (05

D 0 years, 20 years 10 years, 10 years D 5,0 11

(a) (b)

One way to identify the unique Nash equilibrium in the prisoners’ dilemma
is to eliminate all strictly dominated strategies. A strategy X is said to strictly
dominate another strategy Y if choosing X is better than choosing Y no matter

225

===== PAGE 245 =====

226 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

what the other player does. Because no rational agent will play a strictly dominated strategy, such strategies can be eliminated from consideration when
searching for Nash equilibria. In the prisoners’ dilemma, defection strictly
dominates cooperation, so cooperation can be eliminated. No rational player
will cooperate, and both will defect.

Notice that the result holds even though both prisoners agree that it
would have been better if they had both cooperated. An outcome X is said to
Pareto dominate another Y if all players weakly prefer X to Y and at least one
player strictly prefers X to Y. An outcome is Pareto optimal if it is not Pareto
dominated by any other outcome. In the prisoners’ dilemma, the cooperative
outcome (C, C) Pareto dominates the Nash equilibrium (D, D) . In fact, both
players strictly prefer the former to the latter. Still, rational players will jointly
choose an outcome which is not Pareto optimal. For this reason, the prisoners’ dilemma is sometimes presented — for example, in the film A Beautiful
Mind, about game theory inventor and Nobel laureate John Nash — as refuting
Adam Smith’s insight that the rational pursuit of individual self-interest leads
to socially desirable outcomes.

Many real-world interactions have features that are reminiscent of the
prisoners’ dilemma. Arms races are classic examples. Consider the nuclear
buildup in India and Pakistan. Whether or not India has nuclear arms,
Pakistan wants them. If India has them, Pakistan needs them to preserve the
balance of power; if India does not have them, Pakistan wants them to get the
upper hand. For the same reason, India wants nuclear arms whether or not
Pakistan has them. Thus, both countries acquire nuclear arms, neither country
has the upper hand, and both countries are worse off than if neither had them.
Overfishing, deforestation, pollution, and many other phenomena are other
classic examples. The idea is that no matter what other players do, each player
has an incentive to fish, cut down forests, and pollute, but, if everyone does,
everyone is worse off than if nobody had acted.

Anumber of different solutions might occur to you. What if the two prisoners, before committing the crime, got together and promised to cooperate
in the event that they are caught? Surely, you might think, a gentleman’s
agreement and a handshake would do the trick. The solution fails, however, because whatever verbal agreement the prisoners might have entered
into before getting caught will not be binding. At the end of the day, each
has to make a choice in isolation, defection strictly dominates cooperation,
and a rational agent has no choice but to defect. “Talk is cheap,” the saying
goes, which is why game theorists refer to non-binding verbal agreements as
cheap talk.

What if the game could be repeated? Repetition, you might think, should
afford a prisoner the opportunity to punish defection by defecting. But suppose the two prisoners play ten prisoners’ dilemma games against each other.
To find the equilibrium in the repeated game, we start at the end and use a
procedure called backward induction. In the last round, no rational prisoner
will cooperate, because his opponent has no way to retaliate against defection; so in round ten, both prisoners will defect. In the next to last round, a
rational prisoner already knows that his opponent will defect in round ten,
which means that it does not matter whether he cooperates or defects; so in

===== PAGE 246 =====

Chapter 10 Analytical Game Theory

round nine, both prisoners will defect. The same thing is true for round eight,
round seven, and so on. In this way, the prospect of rational cooperation in
the repeated prisoners’ dilemma unravels from the end. Repetition does not
necessarily solve the problem.

Cooperation can be sustained if there is no last round, that is, if the game is
repeated indefinitely. In the indefinitely repeated prisoners’ dilemma, there is
a Nash equilibrium in which both prisoners cooperate throughout but are prepared to punish defection by defecting. The cooperative solution presupposes
that the players do not discount the future too much: if they do, no amount
of repetition will save the prisoners. And there is no guarantee that rational
individuals will play that particular equilibrium. In fact, there is an infinite
number of equilibria in the indefinitely repeated prisoners’ dilemma, and in
one of those equilibria prisoners always defect. In brief, indefinite repetition
upholds the prospect of rational cooperation in the prisoners’ dilemma, but
cooperation is far from guaranteed.

There is only one sure-fire way for rational agents to avoid defection, and
it is to make sure they are not playing a prisoners’ dilemma at all. Suppose
that the two criminals, before committing their crimes, go to the local contract killer and instruct him to kill anyone who defects in the event that he
is caught. If death at the hands of a contract killer is associated with a utility
of -0, the payoff matrix of the two prisoners will now look like Table 10.6.
Here, cooperation strictly dominates defection for both players and (C, C) is
the unique Nash equilibrium. You might think that it would never be in a person’s interest to ask to be killed by a contract killer, no matter what the conditions; yet, by proceeding in this way, the prisoners can guarantee themselves
a much better payoff than if they had not. But notice that cooperation is the
uniquely rational strategy only because the two prisoners are no longer playing a prisoners’ dilemma.

Table 10.6 The modified prisoners’ dilemma

Cc D
Cc 3,3 0,-2
D 0,0 —00,—00

Example 10.7 The Leviathan The seventeenth-century political philosopher
Thomas Hobbes offered a justification of political authority by imagining what
life would be like without it. In one of the most famous lines in the history of
Western philosophy, Hobbes described this “state of nature” as follows:

[During] the time men live without a common power to keep them all in
awe, they are in that condition which is called war, and such a war as is
of every man against every man ... In such condition there is ... continual
fear and danger of violent death, and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty,
brutish, and short.

The solution, according to Hobbes, is a covenant according to which people
give up their right to kill and maim other people in exchange for the right

227

===== PAGE 247 =====

228 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

| Mgelicm ities § The Leviathan. Detail of the frontispiece from the 1651 edition

not to be killed and maimed, and which at the same time establishes an overwhelming power — a Leviathan — to ensure that people adhere to the terms of
the covenant (see Figure 10.2).

Game theory offers a new way to interpret the nature of this “war of all
against all.” These days, many people think of Hobbes’s story as a vivid
description of a scenario in which people are forced to play prisoners’ dilemmas against each other, and in which the pursuit of rational self-interest therefore leads to the worst possible outcome for all involved. The Leviathan in
Hobbes’s story serves the same function as the contract killer in the scenario
above: by holding people to their promises, he ensures that rational selfinterest coincides with social desirability.

10.3 Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies

Some games have no Nash equilibria in pure strategies. But that does not
mean that they do not have Nash equilibria.

Example 10.8 Coffee shops, cont. Suppose that you still have to go to one
of the two coffee shops in Example 10.3 and that your ex has to also. You do
not want to run into your ex, but your ex wants to run into you. What kind of
game would you be playing against each other?

===== PAGE 248 =====

Chapter 10 Analytical Game Theory 229

If a player gets a utility of 1 whenever his or her goal is attained and 0 otherwise, the payoff matrix is Table 10.7.

Table 10.7 A pure coordination game
Lucy’s Crestwood

Lucy’s 1,0 0,1
Crestwood 0,1 1,0

This game has no Nash equilibria in pure strategies. If you go to Lucy’s, your
ex will want to go there too, but then you want to go to Crestwood, in which
case your ex wants to do so too. This coffee shop game, by the way, has the
same payoff structure as a game called matching pennies. When two people
play matching pennies, each flips a penny. If both coins come up heads, or if
both coins come up tails, Player I wins; otherwise, Player II wins. This also
happens to be an example of a zero-sum game, a game in which whenever
one player wins, another player loses.

The game does, however, have a Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies.
Suppose that you figure out where to go by flipping a coin, and that your
ex does the same. Given that you have a 50 percent chance of ending up at
Lucy’s and a 50 percent chance of ending up at Crestwood, your ex is indifferent between Lucy’s and Crestwood and can do no better than flipping a coin.
And given that your ex has a 50 percent chance of ending up at Lucy’s and
a 50 percent chance of ending up at Crestwood, you are indifferent between.
Lucy’s and Crestwood and can do no better than flipping a coin. Hence, the
two of you are in a Nash equilibrium, though you are playing mixed rather
than pure strategies.

Ina game like this, the mixed-strategy equilibrium is easy to find. In other
games it can be more tricky. Consider the battle of the sexes (Example 10.4). In
order to find a mixed-strategy equilibrium in a game like this, there is one critical insight: in order for players to rationally play a mixed strategy, they must
be indifferent between the pure strategies they are mixing. Why? If a player
strictly preferred one over the other, the only rational thing to do would be
to play the preferred strategy with probability one. Thus, you can find the
mixed-strategy equilibrium in a game by setting up equations and solving for
the probabilities with which the players play different strategies.

Example 10.9 Battle of the sexes, cont. In order to find the mixed-strategy
equilibrium in the battle of the sexes (Table 10.8), let us assume that Player I
plays U with probability p and D with probability (1 — p) and that Player II
plays L with probability g and R with probability (1 — q).

Consider Player I first. In order to play a mixed strategy, he must be indifferent between U and D, meaning that u(U) = u(D). The utility of playing U
will depend on what Player II does, that is, on what q is. When playing U,
Player I has a probability of q of getting 2 utiles and a probability of (1 — q)
of getting 0. Consequently, u(U) = q * 2 + (1 — q) * 0 = 2q. When playing D,
Player I has a probability of q of getting 0 utiles and a probability of (1 — q) of

===== PAGE 249 =====

230 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

getting 1. Thus, u(D) = q *0 + (1 — q)*1=1— q. So u(U) = u(D) entails that
2q = 1 — q, meaning that q = 1/3.

Next, consider Player II. In order to play a mixed strategy, she needs to be
indifferent between L and R, meaning that u(L) = u(R). Now u(L) = p #1 +
(1 — p)*0=pandu(R) =p*0+ (1 — p) *2 =2 — 2p.Sou(L) = u{R) entails
that p = 2 — 2p, meaning that p = 2/3.

Hence, there is a Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies in which Player I
plays U with probability 2/3 and Player II plays L with probability 1/3. In the
mixed-strategy equilibrium, Player I gets payoff u(U) = u(D) = 2q = 2/3 and
Player II gets payoff u(L) = u(R) = p = 2/3.

Table 10.8 An impure coordination game

L R
U 2,1 0,0

D 0,0 1,2

As this example shows, games with pure-strategy equilibria may also have
mixed equilibria.

Exercise 10.10 Mixed-strategy equilibrium Find the mixed-strategy Nash
equilibria in Tables 10.4(a) and (b).

In the mixed-strategy equilibrium in (a), notice that Player I is more likely to
play D than U and that Player II is more likely to play R than L. This might seem
strange, since you would perhaps expect the players to be more likely to play
the strategy associated with the more desirable equilibrium (U, L). But assume
for a proof by contradiction that the two players are in a mixed-strategy equilibrium in which Player I plays U and Player II plays L with some high probability.
If so, Player I would strictly prefer U to D and Player II would strictly prefer L
to R. Thus, the two players would not be in equilibrium at all, contrary to the
initial assumption. For the two players to want to mix, they must be indifferent between the two pure strategies, and this can happen only when Player I is
more likely to play D than U and when Player II is more likely to play R than L.

Notice also that the probability p with which Player I plays U is a function not of Player I’s own payoffs, but of Player II’s payoffs. This might seem
equally counterintuitive. Yet, it follows from the fact that p must be selected
in such a manner as to make Player II indifferent between her pure strategies.
Similarly, the probability q with which Player II plays L is determined not by
her payoffs, but by her opponent Player I’s payoffs. This is a fascinating feature of Nash equilibria in mixed strategies.

Exercise 10.11 Pure vs. mixed equilibria Find all Nash equilibria (in pure
and mixed strategies) in the games depicted in Table 10.9.

Although a mixed-strategy equilibrium may at first blush seem like an artificial construct of mainly academic interest, mixed strategies are important and

===== PAGE 250 =====

Chapter 10 Analytical Game Theory 231

common in a wide variety of strategic interactions. Even if you are a tennis
player with a killer cross-court shot, it would be unwise to hit the cross-court
shot every time, or your opponent will learn to expect it. Every so often, you
must hit the ball down the line. In games like these, in order to keep your
opponent guessing, you must mix it up a bit. This analysis shows that it is not
a mistake, but necessary, every so often to hit your weaker shot.

Table 10.9 Mixed Nash equilibrium exercises

L R L R L R

U 5,2 1,1 U 41 2,0 U 1, 0,0
D 1,1 2,5 D 5,1 1,2 D 0,0 0,0
(a) (b) ©

Example 10.12 Spousonomics According to the authors of the book
Spousonomics: “Economics is the surest route to marital bliss” because “it offers
dispassionate, logical solutions to what can often seem like thorny, illogical,
and highly emotional domestic disputes.” Suppose that you are stuck in an
equilibrium where you do the dishes, make the bed, and empty the cat litter
while your spouse sits back and relaxes. Spousonomics, apparently, teaches
that you can turn your spouse into an acceptable (if not ideal) partner by playing a mixed strategy, by sometimes doing the laundry, sometimes not, sometimes making the bed, sometimes not, and so on.

Exercise 10.13 Rock-paper-scissors

(a) Draw the payoff matrix for the game rock-paper-scissors. Suppose that a
win gives you 1 utile, a tie 0, and a loss -1.

(b) What is the unique Nash equilibrium in this game?

We already know that not all games have Nash equilibria in pure strategies.
But now that we have access to the concept of a Nash equilibrium in mixed
strategies itis possible to prove a famous theorem originally due to John Nash.
Simplified and expressed in words:

Theorem 10.14 Nash’s theorem Every finite game — that is, every game in
which all players have a finite number of pure strategies — has a Nash equilibrium.

Proof. Omitted.

Given this theorem, the search for Nash equilibria is not futile. As long as the
number of pure strategies available to each player is finite - and whether this
condition is satisfied is fairly easy to determine - we know that the game has
at least one Nash equilibrium in pure or mixed strategies. This is neat.

Example 10.15 Chess Chess is a finite game. We know this because every
player has a finite number of moves to choose from at any point in the game

===== PAGE 251 =====

232 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

and because every game ends after a finite number of moves. Because it is a
finite game, Nash’s theorem establishes that it has an equilibrium.

This suggests that chess should be uninteresting, at least when played by
experienced players. Assuming Player I plays the equilibrium strategy, Player
IIcan do no better than playing the equilibrium strategy, and vice versa. Thus,
we should expect experienced players to implement the equilibrium strategies every time, and the outcome to be familiar and predictable.

Yet Nash’s theorem only establishes the existence of an equilibrium; it does
not reveal what the equilibrium strategies are. As of yet, no computer is powerful enough to figure out what they are. And even if we knew what the strategies were, they might be too complex for human beings to implement. Thus,
chess is likely to remain interesting for a good long time.

Before we move on, two more exercises.

Exercise 10.16 Chicken The game of chicken was popularized in the 1955
film Rebel Without a Cause, starring James Dean. The game is played by two people who drive cars straight at each other at high speed; the person who swerves
first is called “chicken” and becomes an object of contempt. In this game, the
British philosopher Bertrand Russell saw an analogy with Cold War policy:

Since the nuclear stalemate became apparent, the Governments of East
and West have adopted the policy which [US Secretary of State] Mr Dulles
calls “brinkmanship”. This is a policy adapted from a sport which, I
am told, is practised by some youthful degenerates. This sport is called
“Chicken!” ... As played by irresponsible boys, this game is considered
decadent and immoral, though only the lives of the players are risked. But
when the game is played by eminent statesmen, who risk not only their
own lives but those of many hundreds of millions of human beings, it is
thought on both sides that the statesmen on one side are displaying a high
degree of wisdom and courage, and only the statesmen on the other side
are reprehensible. This, of course, is absurd.

Imagine that each player has the choice between swerving (S) and not swerving (-S), and that the payoff structure is that of Table 10.10. Find all Nash
equilibria in this game.

Table 10.10 Chicken

Ss aS
s 3,3 2,5

7S 5,2 11

Ina branch of game theory called evolutionary game theory, this game figures
prominently under the heading of hawk & dove. Hawks are willing to fight to
the death whereas doves easily give up. The best possible outcome for you is
when you are a hawk and your opponent is a dove, the second best outcome

===== PAGE 252 =====

Chapter 10 Analytical Game Theory

is when both of you are doves, the third best is when you are a dove and your
opponent is a hawk, and the worst possible outcome is when both of you are
hawks. If doves “swerve” and hawks do not, the payoff structure of hawk &
dove is the same as that of chicken. In evolutionary game theory, the mixedstrategy equilibrium is interpreted as describing a population in which hawks
and doves coexist in given proportions — just as they do in the real world.

Exercise 10.17 The stag hunt This game is due to Jean-Jacques Rousseau,
the eighteenth-century French philosopher. Rousseau describes a scenario in
which two individuals go hunting. The two can hunt hare or deer but not
both. Anyone can catch a hare by himself, but the only way to bag a deer is
for both hunters to pursue the deer. A deer is much more valuable than a hare.
The stag hunt, which is thought to provide an important parable for social
cooperation, is usually represented as in Table 10.11. What are the Nash equilibria (in pure and mixed strategies) of this game?

Table 10.11 The stag hunt

D H
D 3,3 0,1
H 1,0 1,1

Notice how superficially subtle differences in the payoff structure between the
prisoners’ dilemma (Table 10.5(b)), chicken (Table 10.10), and the stag hunt
(Table 10.11) lead to radically different results.

10.4 Equilibrium refinements

The concept of a Nash equilibrium is associated with a number of controversial results. In this section, we consider two alternative equilibrium concepts,
designed to deal with supposedly problematic cases.

Example 10.18 Trembling-hand perfection Let us return to Table 10.9(c). As
you know, (U, L) is a Nash equilibrium. (D, L) is not an equilibrium, since
Player I can improve his payoff by playing U instead of D, and neither is
{U, R). But consider (D, R). If Player II plays R, Player I can do no better than
playing D; if Player I plays D, Player II can do no better than playing R. Thus,
{D, R) is a Nash equilibrium. There are no mixed equilibria. No matter what
Player II does, Player I will never be indifferent between U and D, and no
matter what Player I does, Player II will never be indifferent between Land R.

There is nothing wrong with the analysis here, but there is something odd
about the second equilibrium {D, R). A strategy X is said to weakly dominate
another strategy Y if choosing X is no worse than choosing Y no matter what
the other player does, and choosing X is better than choosing Y for at least one
strategy available to the other player. In Example 10.18, U weakly dominates

233

===== PAGE 253 =====

234 Part5

Strategic Interaction

D and L weakly dominates R. Thus, there seems to be no reason why rational
individuals would ever play the second equilibrium (D, R). And the problem
is not that (1,1) Pareto dominates (0,0) (see Section 10.2).

The concept of a trembling-hand-perfect equilibrium was designed to
handle this kind of situation.

Definition 10.19 Trembling-hand-perfect equilibrium —Atrembling-handperfect equilibrium is a Nash equilibrium that remains a best response for each
player even when others have some minuscule probability of trembling, that is,
accidentally playing an out-of-equilibrium strategy.

In Table 10.9(c), (U, L) is a trembling-hand-perfect equilibrium: even if there
is a minuscule probability « > 0 that Player II plays R, she still plays L with
probability (1 — e) and U remains a best response for Player I. (And similarly
for the other player.) By contrast, (D, R) is not trembling-hand perfect. If there
is a minuscule probability « > 0 that Player II plays L, no matter how small, U
is a strictly preferred strategy for Player I.

Exercise 10.20 Battle of the sexes, cont. Are the two pure-strategy equilibria in the battle of the sexes (Table 10.8) trembling-hand perfect?

Trembling-hand-perfect equilibrium is a refinement of Nash equilibrium. This
means that every trembling-hand-perfect equilibrium is a Nash equilibrium,
but not every Nash equilibrium is trembling-hand perfect.

Exercise 10.21 Trembling-hand perfection Find (a) all Nash equilibria in
pure strategies in Table 10.12 and (b) identify which of them are tremblinghand perfect.

Table 10.12 Trembling-hand perfection, cont.

L M R
U 14 0,0 0,0
M 0,0 41 0,0

D 0,0 0,0 0,0

Substituting the concept of trembling-hand-perfect equilibrium for the concept of Nash equilibrium would eliminate some problematic implications of
the Nash-equilibrium concept. The concept of trembling-hand equilibrium is,
however, insufficient to deal with all problematic cases.

Example 10.22 Credible versus non-credible threats Consider a game with
two stages. In the first stage, Player I plays U or D. If Player I plays D, both
players get a payoff of 2. If Player I plays U, it is Player II’s turn. In the second
stage, Player II plays L or R; if Player II plays L, Player I gets 5 and Player II
gets 1. If Player II plays R, both get 0. What are the Nash equilibria of this game?

===== PAGE 254 =====

Chapter 10 Analytical Game Theory 235

The game can be represented as in Table 10.13. There are two Nash equilibria: (U, L) and (D, R).

Table 10.13 Subgame perfection

L R
U 5,1 0,0
D 2,2 2,2

Yet there is something odd about the second of the two equilibria. The only
thing preventing Player I from playing U is the threat of Player II playing R.
But suppose that Player I did play U. Then, Player II would have the choice of
playing L (for a payoff of 1) and R (for a payoff of 0). In the second stage, it is
not in Player II's interest to play R. So while it is perfectly possible for Player
II to threaten to play R if Player I plays U, she would have no interest in carrying out the threat. Knowing this, it appears that Player I should just go ahead
and play U. Game theorists say that the problem is that Player II’s threat is
not credible. Many people think that it is problematic that a Nash equilibrium
might involve a non-credible threat. And the problem is not that the Nash
equilibrium is not trembling-hand perfect.

Games with multiple stages are called sequential. To analyze such
games, it is often useful to use a tree-like representation called the extensive
form. The game from Example 10.22 can, for example, be represented as in
Figure 10.3. This representation affords another way to spell out the problem. Consider that part of the game which starts at the node where Player
II moves (see the shaded area in the figure). We refer to it as a subgame of
the original game. In the subgame, Player II has two strategies (L and R) and
there is only one Nash equilibrium: to play L (for a payoff of 1) rather than R
(for a payoff of 0). Yet the Nash equilibrium in the game requires Player II to
play R in the subgame. One way to spell out the problem, then, is to say that

(2,2)

mI Figure 10.3 | Subgame perfection

===== PAGE 255 =====

236 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

the Nash equilibrium of the game requires Player II to play a strategy that is
not a Nash equilibrium in the subgame.

Consistent with this analysis, game theorists have proposed another equilibrium concept: subgame-perfect equilibrium. As suggested in the previous
paragraph, a subgame of a game is any part of that game which in itself constitutes a game. A game is always its own subgame, but in this case there is a
proper subgame starting at the node where Player IT moves.

Definition 10.23 Subgame-perfect equilibrium A subgame-perfect equilibrium is a strategy profile that constitutes a Nash equilibrium in each subgame.

Like trembling-hand-perfect equilibrium, subgame-perfect equilibrium is a
refinement of Nash equilibrium: all subgame-perfect equilibria are Nash equilibria, but not all Nash equilibria are subgame perfect.

One way to find subgame-perfect equilibria is to start at the end and
use backward induction. Backward induction would tell you to start with
the last subgame, that is, at the node where Player II moves (the shaded
area of the figure). Since L would lead to a payoff of 1 and R would lead to
a payoff of 0, L is the unique Nash equilibrium strategy. So, in subgameperfect equilibrium, Player II will play L. Given that Player II will play L,
what will Player I do at the first node? Player I has the choice between
playing U for a payoff of 3, and playing D for a payoff of 2. Thus, Player I
will play U. In brief, there is only one subgame-perfect equilibrium in this
game, and it is (U, L).

Example 10.24 MAD Mutually assured destruction (MAD) is a military
doctrine according to which two superpowers (such as the US and the USSR)
can maintain peace by threatening to annihilate the human race in the event
of an enemy attack. Suppose that the US moves first in a game like that in
Figure 10.3. The US can launch an attack (U) or not launch an attack (D). If it
launches an attack, the USSR can refrain from retaliating (L) or annihilate the
human race (R). Given the payoff structure of the game in the figure, (D, R)
is a Nash equilibrium. The doctrine is flawed, however, in that the threat is
not credible: the MAD Nash equilibrium presupposes that USSR forces are
willing to annihilate the human race in the event of a US attack, which would
obviously not be in their interest. Thus, the MAD Nash equilibrium is not
subgame perfect.

In Stanley Kubrick’s 1963 film Dr Strangelove, the USSR tries to circumvent the problem by building a doomsday machine: a machine that in the
event of an enemy attack (or when tampered with) automatically launches an
attack powerful enough to annihilate the human race. Such a machine would
solve the strategic problem, because it guarantees retaliation to enemy attack
and therefore makes the threat credible. As the film illustrates, however, such
machines are associated with other problems. To begin with, you must not
forget to tell your enemy that you have one.

Exercise 10.25 Subgame perfection Use backward induction to find the
unique subgame-perfect equilibrium in the game in Figure 10.4. Recall that a

===== PAGE 256 =====

Chapter 10 Analytical Game Theory

(3,1) (1,3) (2,1) (0,0)

| Figure 10.4 | ateem ~Subgame perfection exercise

strategy is a complete plan of action, which means that a strategy for Player
TI will have the form “L at the first node and L at the second (LL),” “R at the
first node and L at the second (RL),” and the like. In this game, then, whereas
Player I only has two strategies to choose from, Player II has four.

Finally, one more exercise:

Exercise 10.26 The centipede game The centipede game has four stages
(see Figure 10.5). At each stage, a player can Take, thereby ending the game,
or Pass, thereby increasing the total payoff and allowing the other player to
move.

(a) Use backward induction to find the unique subgame-perfect equilibrium.
(b) Would the outcome of the game differ if it had 1000 stages instead of four?

(6.0)

(1,0) (0,2) (3,0) (0,4)

mm Figure 10.5 | The centipede game

10.5 Discussion

Like the theories we came across earlier in this book, analytical game theory
admits of descriptive and normative interpretations. According to the descriptive interpretation, game theory captures the manner in which people behave
when they engage in strategic interactions. In this view, game theory predicts that people will jointly choose an equilibrium strategy profile. Specific
predictions, of course, will depend not only on the game played, but on the

237

===== PAGE 257 =====

238 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

equilibrium concept that is employed. According to the normative interpretation, game theory describes how rational agents should behave when they
engage in strategic interaction. In this view, game theory says that players
should jointly choose an equilibrium strategy profile. Again, the specific
advice offered by the theory will depend on the game played and the equilibrium concept employed.

One thing to notice is that games do not necessarily have a unique equilibrium. And analytical game theory in itself does not contain the resources
required to identify which equilibrium people will or should play. While the
theory can be interpreted as predicting that the outcome of strategic interaction will or should be a Nash equilibrium, this is only to say that some
Nash equilibrium will or should obtain. In this sense, then, the theory is indeterminate. And because some games (like the indefinitely repeated prisoners’ dilemma) have an infinite number of equilibria, the theory is radically
indeterminate.

If we want determinate predictions, we must augment the theory with
additional resources. The most famous such effort is the theory of focal
points, due to 2005 Nobel laureate Thomas C. Schelling. According to this
theory, some equilibria tend to stand out in the minds of the players. Schelling
predicts that people will frequently succeed in selecting such equilibria. The
precise feature of an equilibrium that makes it stand out in the minds of the
players is far from obvious.

Finding the key ... may depend on imagination more than on logic; it may
depend on analogy, precedent, accidental arrangement, symmetry, aesthetic or geometric configuration, casuistic reasoning, and who the parties
are and what they know about each other.

This theory can explain why people favor (U, L) over (D, R) in Table 10.9(c).
When there is a unique Pareto-optimal outcome that also happens to be a
Nash equilibrium, it seems plausible to assume that people will use Pareto
optimality as a focal point. If so, we might be able to explain observed behavior without making the transition to trembling-hand-perfect equilibrium.

In the next chapter, we will explore behavioral economists’ challenge to
analytical game theory.

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 10.27 Paradoxes of rationality Experimental economists have
invited students with different majors to play prisoners’ dilemma games
against each other. In an experiment pitching economics majors against
economics majors, and non-majors against non-majors, who would you
expect to do better?

Chapter 11 contains more game-theoretic exercises.

===== PAGE 258 =====

Chapter 10 Analytical Game Theory 239

FURTHER READING

There are many fine introductions to game theory, including Binmore (2007), Dixit et al.
(2009), and Osborne and Rubinstein (1994). Soousonomics is Szuchman and Anderson
(2011, pp. xii-xv, 294-98). Life in the state of nature is described in Hobbes (1994
[1651], xiii, 8-9, p. 76). Skyrms (1996) discusses the doctrine of mutually assured
destruction (pp. 22-25) and the games of chicken and hawk & dove (pp. 65-67); Russell
(1959, p. 30) examines the game of chicken. The theory of focal points is due to Schelling
(1960, p. 57). Evidence about economics majors’ performance in prisoner dilemma games
can be found in Frank et al. (1993).

===== PAGE 259 =====

CHAPTER

l i Behavioral Game
Theory

11.1 Introduction

Analytical game theory is in many ways a huge success story: it is increasingly becoming the foundation of other subdisciplines of economics (including microeconomics) and it has migrated to philosophy, biology, political
science, government, public policy, and elsewhere. But, as we will see in this
chapter, its descriptive adequacy and normative correctness are controversial.
Behavioral game theory aims to study the degree to which analytical game
theory succeeds in capturing the behavior of real people engaging in strategic
interaction, and proposes extensions of analytical game theory in the interest
of capturing that behavior. Yet some of the proposed extensions to analytical
game theory do not in fact constitute deviations from neoclassical orthodoxy.
Thus, there is nothing distinctively behavioral about some of the models discussed under the heading “behavioral game theory.” Other models, however,
constitute real deviations from neoclassical orthodoxy.

11.2 Social preferences: Altruism, envy, fairness,
and justice

Much of the literature on social preferences is driven by data from two games:
the ultimatum game and the dictator game. Both are played by two agents:
a proposer (Player I) and a responder (Player II). Here, these games are outlined as they are presented to participants in laboratory experiments, where
outcomes are described in terms of dollars and cents rather than in terms of
the utilities that players derive from them. In order to analyze the interaction,
we need to transform the dollars and cents into utilities. Strictly speaking, you
do not even know what game the players are playing until you have identified
payoffs in utility terms. But doing so is far from obvious, as we will see.

The ultimatum game has two stages. At the outset, the proposer is given
a fixed amount of money; for purposes of this discussion, let us suppose it
is $10. In the first stage, Player I proposes a division of the dollar amount;
that is, the proposer offers some share of the $10 to the other player. The
proposer might propose to give it all away (leaving nothing for himself), to
give none of it away (leaving all of it for himself), or to offer some fraction
of the $10 to the other player (leaving the balance for himself). For example, the proposer might offer $4, leaving $6 for himself. In the second stage,
the responder accepts or rejects the proposed division. If she accepts, both

===== PAGE 260 =====

Chapter 11 Behavioral Game Theory

($6,$4) —_($0,$0)

| Figure 11.1 | The ultimatum game (in dollar terms)

players receive their proposed share; if she rejects, neither player receives
anything. The ultimatum game can be represented as in Figure 11.1. In this
figure, I have omitted all branches corresponding to fractional amounts, and
Thave left out all but one set of branches representing Player II’s decision in
the second stage.

Example 11.1 Dividing the cake When two children have to divide a cake,
they sometimes follow a procedure in which the first child splits the cake in
two and the second chooses first. Given that Kid II will choose the largest
piece, Kid I will want to divide the cake as evenly as possible, thereby guaranteeing a 50-50 split. We can easily imagine a variation of this procedure,
in which Kid I proposes a division of the cake, and Kid II gets to approve (in
which case each child gets the proposed piece) or disapprove (in which case
the parents give the entire cake to the dog). The new procedure would constitute an example of the ultimatum game.

The ultimatum game has been extensively studied by experimental economists. According to Camerer’s survey of the results:

The results ... are very regular. Modal and median ultimatum offers are usually
40-50 percent and means are 30-40 percent. There are hardly any offers in the
outlying categories 0, 1-10, and the hyper-fair category 51-100. Offers of 40-50 are
rarely rejected. Offers below 20 percent or so are rejected about half the time.

Based on these results, we should expect responders to reject offers below $2
when playing the (one-shot, anonymous) game in Figure 11.1. But such low
offers would be rare. By and large, we should expect offers in the $3-$5 range.
Many people have drawn the conclusion that these results are inconsistent
with analytical game theory.

The observed outcomes are quite consistent with Nash equilibrium predictions, however, even when players care about nothing but their own dollar
payoffs. Let us assume that each individual is simply trying to maximize his

241

===== PAGE 261 =====

242 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

or her dollar payoffs, and that u(x} = x. Player I must choose an amount to
offer the other player; suppose that he offers $4. Player II’s strategy is a little
more convoluted. Because a strategy must specify what a player will do under
all possible circumstances (see Section 10.2), Player II's strategy must specify
what she will do at each of the nodes where she might find herself. Suppose
that Player II rejects all proposed divisions in which Player I offers less than
$4 and accepts all others. If so, the two players are in equilibrium. If Player I
decreased his offer, it would be rejected, and both would receive nothing; if
he increased his offer, it would be accepted, but he would receive less. Given
that Player I offers $4, Player II can do no better than accepting. In brief, data
on the ultimatum game do not represent a puzzle from the point of view of
the theory we learned in Section 10.2, since observed outcomes are consistent
with Nash equilibrium predictions. (Given the many equilibria of this game,
though, this is not saying much.)

Nevertheless, many people think the Nash equilibrium prediction
is problematic, since it requires players to reject positive offers. One way
to articulate the problem is to say that the Nash equilibrium in the game
requires players to reject what is in effect a dominant strategy (namely,
accepting) in the subgame that starts at the node where Player II moves.
Another way to articulate the problem is to say that the equilibrium is not
subgame perfect and that Player II’s threat to reject a low offer is not credible
(see Section 10.4). We might, therefore, restrict our analysis to subgameperfect equilibria. Yet there is only one subgame-perfect equilibrium in this
game. In this equilibrium, Player I offers nothing and Player II accepts all
offers. This might be counterintuitive. But it is a Nash equilibrium because
(a) given Player I’s offer, Player II would be no better off if she rejected it,
and (b) given that Player II accepts all offers, Player I can do no better than to
keep all the money for himself. It is a subgame-perfect equilibrium, because
Player II’s strategy is also a Nash equilibrium strategy in all subgames: no
matter what she has been offered, she cannot improve her payoff by rejecting the offer. A prediction based on the idea of subgame-perfect equilibrium,
given our assumption about the two players’ utility function, is in fact inconsistent with the experimental results.

The dictator game resembles the ultimatum game, except for the fact that
the second stage has been eliminated. In dollar terms and assuming that
the proposer starts out with $10, the dictator game can be represented as
in Figure 11.2; again, I have left out all the branches representing fractional
amounts. On the assumption that the players’ utility function remains u(x) = x,
there is only one Nash equilibrium and therefore only one subgame-perfect
equilibrium: the case in which Player I offers nothing to the responder and
keeps all the money for himself.

Example 11.2 Charitable donations One example of a dictator game played
in the real world involves a person’s decision about whether to give money to
charity. Whenever you walk by a beggar, for example, you are in effect playing
a dictator game in which you must propose some allocation of the money in
your pocket with the panhandler. If you walk on, you have in effect picked the
maximally selfish, Nash-equilibrium allocation.

===== PAGE 262 =====

Chapter 11 Behavioral Game Theory

($10,$0) ($8,$2) {$6,$4) ($4,$6) {$2,$8) ($0,$10)
($9,$1) ($7,$3) ($5,$5) ($3,$7) ($1,$9)

| Figure 11.2 | The dictator game (in dollar terms)

Experimental evidence suggests that proposers in the (one-shot, anonymous)
dictator game typically offer less than proposers in the (one-shot, anonymous)
ultimatum game. That said, many proposers are nevertheless willing to share
a substantial amount (10-30 percent) of their initial allocation. In the version
of the game in Figure 11.2, this means that the proposer would be willing to
share $1-$3 with the responder, even though the latter has no way to penalize
proposers who offer nothing.

The literature on social preference grapples with these phenomena. This
literature is based on the assumption that people sometimes care not only
about their own attainment but about other people’s attainment too. We can
model this by assuming that a person P’s utility function u,(-) has two or more
arguments. Thus, P’s utility function may be given by u,(x, y), where x is P’s
attainment and y is the other person Q’s attainment.

It is quite possible for P to derive positive utility from Q’s attainment, so
that u,(x, y) is an increasing function of y. For example, P’s utility function may
beu,(%y) = ¥Vx + %Vy. If so, P is said to be altruistic and to have altruistic
preferences. Some parents, relatives, friends, and admirers are willing to make
teal sacrifices in order to improve another person’s situation. This is easily
explained if we assume that their utility is (in part) a function of the other
person’s attainment. Altruism in this sense might be what Adam Smith had in
mind when he said: “[There] are evidently some principles in [man’s] nature,
which interest him in the fortune of others, and render their happiness necessary to him” (quoted in Section 1.2).

There is no requirement that P derive positive utility from Q’s attainment.
In fact, u,(x, y} may be a decreasing function of y. For example, P’s utility
function may be u,(x,y) = Vx — Vy. This specification entails that P’s utility
goes up when Q’s attainment goes down and vice versa. If so, P is said to be
envious. Some Prius hybrid-car owners derive deep satisfaction from rising
gasoline prices. This cannot be explained by reference to the financial effects
of gasoline prices on the Prius owner: though fuel-efficient, a Prius remains a
gasoline-powered car, so rising gasoline prices will hurt Prius owners too. But
it can be explained if we assume that the disutility Prius owners derive from.
getting less gasoline for their dollar is outweighed by the utility they derive
from knowing that SUV owners suffer even more.

243

===== PAGE 263 =====

244 Part5

Strategic Interaction

There is no reason to restrict our analysis to these functional forms.
According to a common interpretation of John Rawls’s theory of justice (see
Section 6.2), societies should be ordered with respect to justice based on the
welfare of the least fortunate in each society. Thus, a person with Rawlsian
preferences might try to maximize the minimum utility associated with the
allocation. If each individual derives Vx utiles from his or her private consumption x, the Rawlsian P might maximize u (x,y) = min (Vx, Vy). Rawls
uses the term “justice as fairness” to describe his theory, so Rawlsian preferences could also be described as preferences for fairness.

Another agent might care about the degree of inequality among the relevant agents, so as to rank allocations based on the absolute difference between
the best and worst off. Such an agent is said to be inequality averse and to
have inequality-averse preferences. If each individual derives Vx utiles from
his or her private consumption x, the inequality-averse P might wish to minimize the absolute difference between each person’s utility. This amounts to
maximizing u,(x,y) = —|Vx—Vyl. Such agents care about equality for its
own sake, unlike the Rawlsians who (given the definition above) care about
equality only insofar as it benefits the least well off. Because the inequalityaverse agent ends up assessing the outcomes of ultimatum and dictator games
so similarly to the Rawlsian agent, I will not discuss this case further.

Utilitarians like Bentham, whom we came across in Section 1.2, believe that
we should pursue the greatest good for the greatest number. Thus, a utilitarian
agent might try to maximize the total amount of utility derived from private
consumption. If each individual derives Vx utiles from his or her private consumption x, the utilitarian P might maximize u,(x,y) = Vx + Vy. So understood, utilitarian preferences constitute a special case of altruistic preferences.
Obviously, this list is far from exhaustive: any agent who derives utility from
another agent’s private consumption counts as having social preferences.

To see how the shape of the proposer’s utility function affects his assessment
of the various outcomes in the ultimatum and dictator games, see Table 11.1.

Table 11.1 Dictator game utility payoffs (maxima in boldface)

Payoffs Player P’s utility function u,(x, y)

(wy) VE Vet Vy VE Vy omin(VE,Vy) BE + 2 Vy
($10, $0) 3.16 3.16 3.16 0.00 1.90

($9, $1) 3.00 4.00 2.00 1.00 2.20

( ) 2.83 4.24 141 1.41 2.26

( ) 2.65 438 0.91 1.73 2.28

( ) 2.45 445 0.45 2.00 2.27

($5, $5) 2.24 4.47 0.00 2.24 2.24
( )
( )
( )
(
(

2.00 4.45 —0.45 2.00 2.18
1.73 4.38 0.91 1.73 2.10
1.41 4.24 -141 141 1.98
$1, $9) 1.00 4.00 —2.00 1.00 1.80
$0, $10) 0.00 3.16 -3.16 0.00 1.26

===== PAGE 264 =====

Chapter 11 Behavioral Game Theory

When the payoff is ($0, $0) all kinds of agents receive zero utility. Egoists and
enviers prefer the outcome where they get all the money. Utilitarians and
Rawlsians prefer outcomes where the dollar amount is split evenly. Finally, an
altruist who gives a little more weight to her own private utility than does a
utilitarian might prefer the outcome ($7, $3) to all others.

It goes without saying that certain kinds of social preference would go a
long way toward explaining proposers’ behavior in the ultimatum and dictator games. Altruists, Rawlsians, and utilitarians actually prefer more equal
outcomes. For such agents, there is nothing mysterious about the fact that they
voluntarily offer non-zero amounts to responders.

Exercise 11.3 Altruism and the ultimatum game Imagine the ultimatum
game from Figure 11.1 played by two utilitarians with u(x,y) = Vx + Vy. Find
the unique subgame-perfect equilibrium in this game.

One important insight underscored by the literature on social preferences is
that the game people are playing depends on their utility functions. The following exercise illustrates how agents with different utility functions end up
playing very different games, even when their interactions superficially might
look identical.

Exercise 11.4 Social preferences and the prisoners’ dilemma Find the Nash
equilibria in pure strategies in Table 11.2, when played by:

(a) Two egoists, for whom u(x,y) = Vx.

(b) Two utilitarians, for whom u(x,y) = Vx + Vy.

(c) Two enviers, for whom u(x,y) = Vx — Vy.

(d) Two Rawlsians, for which u(x,y) = min (Vx, Vy).

Notice that this game (in dollar terms) has the payoff structure of the prisoners’ dilemma (Table 10.5 on page 225).

Table 11.2 Prisoners’ dilemma (in dollar terms)

Cc D
Cc $16,$16 $0,$25
D $25,$0 $9,$9

Social preferences are fascinating and important. Economists who do not allow
for the possibility of social preferences run the risk of committing terrible mistakes, whether they are trying to explain or predict behavior or to design optimal incentives. If we are mistaken about the players’ utility function, we will
not even know what game they are playing. Consequently, our analysis of
their interaction is likely to fail. Consider the game in Table 11.2. Superficially,
when expressed in dollar terms, this looks like a prisoners’ dilemma. But as
Exercise 11.4 showed, the players may in fact be playing a very different game.

Notice, however, that the entire analysis in this section can be completed without departing from neoclassical orthodoxy. As we know from
Sections 1.1 and 2.6, the standard approach makes no assumptions about
the nature of people’s preferences. Consequently, it makes no assumptions

245

===== PAGE 265 =====

246 Part5

Strategic Interaction

about what can enter as an argument in people’s utility function. It is sometimes argued that the results from the dictator and ultimatum games refute
the “selfishness axiom” of neoclassical economics. But this charge is misguided: not only is there no such axiom in the calculus, but selfishness is
not even entailed by the theory. Hence, there is nothing specifically behavioral about models of social preferences; if anything, the analysis shows the
strength and power of the neoclassical framework.

11.3 Intentions, reciprocity, and trust

There is, however, something awkward about the account offered in the previous section. In order to accommodate the behavior of the proposer in the
dictator game, we postulate that proposers are largely altruistic. But in order
to accommodate the behavior of responders in the ultimatum game, this
approach is inadequate. As you can tell from the third column of Table 11.1,
an altruist with utility function u(x,y) = Vx + Vy would prefer any outcome
to ($0, $0). Ina subgame-perfect equilibrium, therefore, an altruistic responder
would accept all offers (see Exercise 11.3). But this is inconsistent with the
observation that low offers frequently are rejected. Of all the agents described
in the table, only the enviers prefer ($0, $0) to a sharply unfavorable division
like ($8, $2). And it would be inconsistent to postulate that people are simultaneously altruistic (to explain their behavior in the dictator game) and envious
(to accommodate their behavior in the ultimatum game).

There are other awkward results. In a variation of the ultimatum game,
responders were found to reject the uneven division ($8, $2) if the proposer had
the choice between ($8, $2) and the even division ($5, $5), but accept it if the proposer had the choice between ($8, $2) and the maximally uneven division ($10,
$0). This makes no sense from the point of view of a responder who evaluates
final outcomes in accordance with either one of the social preference functions in
the previous section. According to each of those models, either ($8, $2) is better
than ($0, $0) or it is not; the choices available to the proposer do not matter at all.

To some analysts, these results suggest that responders do not base their
decisions on the final outcome of the game alone, but are (at least in part)
responsive to what they see as the proposer’s intentions. In this view, people
are willing to reward people who are perceived as having good intentions
and to punish people who are perceived as having bad intentions. A proposer
who offers $2 rather than $0 is interpreted as having good intentions, even if
the resulting allocation is uneven, whereas a proposer who offers $2 rather
than $5 is interpreted as having bad intentions. Sometimes, these results are
discussed in terms of reciprocity or reciprocal altruism. Respondents are said
to exhibit positive reciprocity when they reward players with good intentions
and negative reciprocity when they punish proposers with bad intentions.
Thus, a responder in the ultimatum game who rejects a small positive offer
from the proposer is said to exhibit negative reciprocity.

Reciprocity is often invoked in discussions of the trust game. This game
is played by two players: a sender (Player I) and a receiver (Player IT). At the

===== PAGE 266 =====

Chapter 11 Behavioral Game Theory

outset, both are awarded some initial amount, let us suppose $10. In the first
stage, the sender sends some share $x of his $10 to the receiver. The amount
is sometimes called an “investment.” Before the investment is received by the
receiver, it is multiplied by some factor, let us say three. Thus, the receiver
receives $3x. In the second stage, the receiver returns to the sender some share
$y of her total allocation $10 + $3x. The final outcome, then, is ($10 - $x + $y,
$10 + $3x — $y). The game is called the trust game for the obvious reason that
the sender might trust the receiver to return some of her gains to him. When
both agents maximize u(x) = x, there is only one subgame-perfect equilibrium
in this game. Since the receiver maximizes by keeping all her money, y will
equal zero. Notice that the receiver is in effect playing a dictator game with
the sender as a beneficiary. Given that none of the share $x will be returned
to him, the sender will keep all his money and x will equal zero. Notice that
the resulting allocation ($10, $10) is Pareto inferior to many other attainable
allocations. If x = 10 and y = 20, for example, the final outcome is ($20, $20).

Example 11.5 Investment decisions Suppose that you have the opportunity to invest in a promising business venture, but that you have no way to
recover your expenses in case your business partner turns out to be unreliable.
In order to captures the gains from trade, you simply must trust the partner
to do the job. If so, you and your business partner are playing a trust game
against each other. If you play the subgame-perfect equilibrium strategy, you
will never invest. But if you never invest, you will never capture any of the
available surplus.

Experimental economists have found that senders in the (one-shot, anonymous) trust game on the mean send about half of their initial allocation, and
that receivers return a little less than what was invested. Given the figures
from the previous paragraph, we should expect senders to send about $5 and
receivers to return somewhere between $4 and $5. Thus, Player II succeeds in
capturing some, but not all, of the available surplus. (There is a great deal of
variability across studies, however.)

Why would a responder care to return some of the sender’s investment
when the latter has no way to penalize a receiver who returns nothing?
According to one frequent answer, the receiver feels like she must reciprocate
the sender’s investment. Thus, a receiver who returns some of the sender’s
investment is said to exhibit positive reciprocity. The receiver’s behavior is
also consistent with altruism and inequality aversion. Meanwhile, the sender’s behavior is thought to reflect the expectation that his investment will be
repaid in combination with some degree of altruism.

A similar analysis obtains in the case of prisoners’ dilemma and publicgoods games. We know the prisoners’ dilemma from Section 10.2. In a typical
public-goods game, there are n players. For purposes of this discussion, let us
assume that there are three players. Each is given an initial allocation, say $10.
The game has only one stage, in which all players move simultaneously. Each
player has the option of transferring a share of their initial allocation to a public
account. The money in the public account is multiplied by some factor between.
one and three, say two, and split evenly between the players.

247

===== PAGE 267 =====

248 Part5

Strategic Interaction

Given the nature of the game, the Pareto optimal outcome results when all
players transfer all their money to the public account. In this case, the payoff
is ($20, $20, $20). But the Pareto optimal outcome is not a Nash equilibrium,
for each player can improve his outcome by transferring less. Indeed, there
is only one Nash equilibrium in this game, and it is when nobody transfers
any money to the public account and the outcome is ($10, $10, $10). Publicgoods games therefore have certain structural similarities with the prisoners’
dilemma.

The nature of this interaction should be familiar. Perhaps a set of roommates all prefer the state in which all assist in washing the dishes to the state
in which nobody washes the dishes, but no matter what the others do, each
roommate prefers not to wash any dishes. Thus, nobody washes the dishes
and all suffer the Pareto-inferior outcome. Or, all members in a neighborhood
association prefer the state in which all members spend one day a year cleaning up the neighborhood to the state in which nobody spends any time cleaning up the neighborhood, but no matter what the others do, each member
prefers not to clean the neighborhood. Thus, nobody cleans the neighborhood
and all suffer the Pareto-inferior outcome.

Yet, in experimental studies, cooperation remains a remarkably stubborn
phenomenon. In the prisoners’ dilemma, the fraction of people playing the
cooperative strategy is not 100 percent. But neither is it zero, even when people are playing the one-shot game anonymously. And in anonymous, one-shot
public-goods games, Robyn M. Dawes and Richard H. Thaler report:

While not everyone contributes, there is a substantial number of contributors, and
the public good is typically provided at 40-60 percent of the optimal quantity. That
is, on average, the subjects contribute 40-60 percent of their stake to the public
good. In [one study], these results held in many conditions: for subjects playing
the game for the first time, or after a previous experience; for subjects who believed
they were playing in groups of 4 or 80; and for subjects playing for a range of monetary stakes.

Why do people cooperate in one-shot prisoners’-dilemma and public-goods
games? The experimental results are consistent with a high level of trust in the
other players and with a desire to reciprocate what they expect to be generous contributions from the others. Contrary to predictions in our discussion
about cheap talk (see Section 10.2), pre-play communication actually increases
cooperation in prisoners’ dilemmas and contributions in public goods games.
In this sense, talk — even when cheap — might serve to promote reciprocity.
Other explanations are consistent with the experimental data. Players might,
for example, be altruistic as well. It should be noted that when the game is
repeated, the level of contributions tends to decline. Thus, repetition appears
to bring the players in closer accord with subgame-perfect-equilibrium
predictions.

Predictions based on egoistic utility functions in combination with game
theoretic equilibrium concepts suggest that people will be unable to coordinate
their actions even when it is in their interest to do so. Yet, this is a needlessly
pessimistic vision of human nature. The economist Elinor Ostrom won the

===== PAGE 268 =====

Chapter 11 Behavioral Game Theory

2009 Nobel Prize for exploring ways in which people develop sophisticated
mechanisms that allow them to reach beneficial outcomes in trust and publicgoods style games. There is plenty of evidence from the field and from the
lab suggesting that people do succeed in coordinating their behavior under a
wide range of conditions. Some roommates do succeed in developing mutually acceptable arrangements to make sure the dishes get washed, and some
neighborhood associations do succeed in getting their members to participate
in neighborhood-cleanup operations. Bad social and political philosophy, and
bad social and political institutions, might result from the false assumption
that cooperation cannot emerge spontaneously.

Like social preferences, it is quite possible that a story about intentions,
trust, and reciprocity can be incorporated into the traditional neoclassical
model. There appears to be no principled reason why it cannot be done, and
some game theorists have tried. Because the specifications are a little more
complicated than those in the previous section, they have been left out of this
discussion. That said, it might well be possible to fit the analysis of intentions, reciprocity, and trust into the traditional neoclassical framework. Or it
might not.

11.4 Limited strategic thinking

John Maynard Keynes, one of the most influential economists of the twentieth century, drew an analogy between investing in the stock market and
participating in a certain kind of newspaper contest. In The General Theory of
Employment, Interest and Money, Keynes wrote:

[Professional] investment may be likened to those newspaper competitions in
which the competitors have to pick out the six prettiest faces from a hundred photographs, the prize being awarded to the competitor whose choice most nearly corresponds to the average preferences of the competitors as a whole; so that each
competitor has to pick, not those faces which he himself finds prettiest, but those
which he thinks likeliest to catch the fancy of the other competitors, all of whom are
looking at the problem from the same point of view. It is not a case of choosing those
which, to the best of one’s judgment, are really the prettiest, nor even those which
average opinion genuinely thinks the prettiest.

The basic structure of this strategic interaction is captured by the beautycontest game. Here, n players simultaneously pick a number between zero
and 100 inclusive. The person whose number is closer to seven-tenths of the
average number wins a fixed prize. (The fraction does not have to be seventenths, but it must be common knowledge among the players.)

There is only one Nash equilibrium in this game. In this equilibrium,
every player picks the number zero and everyone ties for first place.
Suppose everyone picked 100, the highest number available. If so, the
winning number would be 70. Thus, no rational person would ever pick a
number greater than 70. But if no one picks a number greater than 70, the
winning number cannot be greater than 49. Yet, if nobody picks a number

249

===== PAGE 269 =====

250 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

greater than 49, the winning number cannot be greater than about 34. And
so on, all the way down to zero.

Real people, however, do not play the Nash equilibrium strategy in the
one-shot game. When played for the first time, answers might fall in the 20-40
range. Interesting things happen when the game is repeated with feedback
about the average number in the previous round. During subsequent rounds,
the average number will decrease and eventually approach zero. This suggests that, over time, real people converge to the Nash equilibrium prediction.

The favored explanation of the result in the one-shot game is based on the
idea that people have different degrees of sophistication. “Level-0” players
just pick a number between zero and 100 randomly. “Level-1” players believe
that all the other players are level-0 players. Level-1 players, therefore, predict
that the mean number will be 50, and therefore pick 0.7 * 50 = 35. Level-2
players believe that all other players are level-1 players and that the average will be 35, and therefore pick 0.7 * 35 ~ 25, and so on. Using statistical
techniques, behavioral game theorists can estimate what proportion of each
sample is level 0, level 1, and so on. The results suggest that most humans are
level-1 or level-2 players.

One fascinating feature of this game is that, even if you know the unique
Nash equilibrium strategy, you may not want to play it. As long as you expect
other players to play out-of-equilibrium strategies and choose a positive number, you will want to do so too. And as long as other players expect you to
expect them to pick a positive number, they will want to pick a positive number.
And so on. Thus, everyone plays a positive number and an out-of-equilibrium
strategy. But, although you want to pick a number greater than zero, the number must not be too high: the aim is to stay one step ahead of the other players.

In keeping with Keynes’s analogy, it has been suggested that this kind of
game captures the dynamics of real markets and can explain bubbles in stock
and real-estate markets. Even if all investors know that the market will ultimately crash, and that the unique Nash equilibrium strategy is to exit the market, they might assume that others will continue to buy for just a little while
longer. As long as individual investors think that they can stay one step ahead
of the competition and exit the market just before everybody else does, they
will want to continue to buy. In the process, of course, they will drive prices
even higher.

Example 11.6 Rock-paper-scissors, cont. The game rock-paper-scissors
has a unique Nash equilibrium, in which both players randomize with probability 1/3, 1/3, and 1/3, and in which both players have an equal probability
of winning (see Exercise 10.13 on page 231). So it might surprise you to hear
that there is a World Rock Paper Scissors Society and a World Championship
competition. According to the Society website, rock-paper-scissors is a
game of skill, not chance: “Humans, try as they might, are terrible at trying to be random [and] in trying to approximate randomness become quite
predictable.”

Here is one piece of advice. The pros will tell you that “rock is for rookies,”
because inexperienced males tend to open with rock. Thus, if your opponent
is one, open with paper. If your opponent is slightly more sophisticated and

===== PAGE 270 =====

Chapter 11 Behavioral Game Theory

may be thinking you will open with rock and therefore opens with paper, open.
with scissors. If you are playing against an even more sophisticated agent,
who will for the reason just identified open with scissors, open with rock.

Here is another piece of advice. Inexperienced players will not expect you
to call your throw ahead of time. Thus, if you announce that you are throwing rock next, an inexperienced opponent will assume that you will not and
instead will choose something other than paper. So you will want to throw
tock. If you play against a slightly more sophisticated agent, though, they will
expect you to throw rock after announcing that you will throw rock; so what
you need to do is to throw scissors.

As in the beauty-contest game, the goal is to stay exactly one step ahead of
your opponent. A similar analysis might apply to people’s performance in
the centipede game (see Exercise 10.26 on page 237}. The typical finding is
that people Pass until a few stages from the end, when they Take. This outcome would be expected if neither player thinks the other will play the unique
subgame-perfect equilibrium, and that both attempt to Take one stage before
the other one does.

Unlike models of social preferences, in this case there is little hope of capturing observed behavior in the one-shot game within the traditional neoclassical model. Things are quite different in the repeated version of the game. As
the same group plays the game again and again, they approximate equilibrium predictions.

11.5 Discussion

According to the great Austrian economist Friedrich A. Hayek, the existence
of spontaneous coordination constitutes the central problem of economic science. Hayek wrote:

From the time of Hume and Adam Smith, the effect of every attempt to understand
economic phenomena — that is to say, of every theoretical analysis — has been to show
that, in large part, the co-ordination of individual efforts in society is not the product of deliberate planning, but has been brought about, and in many cases could
only have been brought about, by means which nobody wanted or understood.

In this view, economists have never seriously doubted that coordination takes
place; the question is how it emerges and is sustained. Much of the behavioral
game theory literature on social preferences, trust, and reciprocity was developed in large part to answer this question. Obviously, this chapter does not
contain a complete account of strategic interaction that fails to fit the picture
painted by analytical game theory, or of the models behavioral game theorists
have offered to capture the way in which people really interact with each other.

To what extent is the work presented under the heading “behavioral game
theory” compatible with the traditional neoclassical framework? As we have
seen, much of what goes under the heading is in fact consistent with analytical game theory. Models of social preferences are clearly consistent, since they

251

===== PAGE 271 =====

252 Part 5

Strategic Interaction

proceed by allowing a person P’s utility function to reflect another person
Q’s attainment. The degree to which ideas of intentions, reciprocity, and trust
can be incorporated into neoclassical theory remains unclear, though game
theorists have tried. Models that try to capture people’s limited ability to think
strategically, by contrast, are more clearly inconsistent with any model that
relies on Nash or subgame-perfect equilibrium concepts.

In defense of analytical game theory, it has been argued that neoclassical theory is only intended to apply under sharply circumscribed conditions.
Thus, the prominent game theorist Ken Binmore writes:

[Neoclassical] economic theory should only be expected to predict in the laboratory

if the following three criteria are satisfied:

¢ The problem the subjects face is not only “reasonably” simple in itself, but is
framed so it seems simple to the subjects;

* The incentives provided are “adequate”;

* The time allowed for trial-and-error adjustment is “sufficient”.

Binmore recognizes that he is also denying the predictive power of neoclassical
economics in the field, and adds: “But have we not got ourselves into enough
trouble already by claiming vastly more than we can deliver?” Binmore’s view
is nicely illustrated by the beauty-contest game (see Section 11.4). Here, real
people’s behavior differs dramatically from Nash equilibrium predictions
during the first round, but converges to it as the game is repeated and players learn the outcome of previous rounds. The same thing might be true for
public-goods and other games. Binmore’s defense of analytical game theory
does not constitute an argument against behavioral game theory, however,
provided behavioral game theory is intended to apply when the three conditions are not satisfied.

| | ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Exercise 11.7 Gandhi A leader of India’s independence movement and
advocate of non-violent social change, Mahatma Gandhi is supposed to
have said: “The true measure of any society can be found in how it treats
its most vulnerable members.” If we interpret this line as an expression
of social preferences, what kind of preferences would that be?

Problem 11.8 Equilibrium concepts We know from Section 10.4 that
some game theorists think the Nash equilibrium concept is problematic, and
that the concept of subgame-perfect equilibrium better captures the behavior of rational agents. But as the single subgame-perfect equilibrium in the
ultimatum game suggests (see Section 11.2), there is something funny about
subgame-perfect equilibrium too. For one thing, the subgame-perfect equilibrium requires the responder to accept an offer of $0. And in most Nash equilibria, the responder does better than this. In your view, which equilibrium
concept offers the best prediction of the behavior of rational agents: Nash or
subgame-perfect equilibrium?

===== PAGE 272 =====

Chapter 11 Behavioral Game Theory 253

FURTHER READING

The best-known and most thorough treatment of behavioral game theory is Camerer
(2003), which includes the quotation summarizing results from the ultimatum game

(p. 49). Kagel and Roth (1995) contains thorough treatments of experimental methods
and results; Durlauf and Blume (2010) offers more concise and up-to-date treatments. A
good review of cooperation in laboratory experiments is Dawes and Thaler (1988), which
among other things summarizes the results of public-goods experiments (p. 189). The
World RPS Society (201 1) will tell you how to beat anyone at rock-paper-scissors. The
two historical quotations are from Keynes (1936, p. 156) and Hayek (1933, p. 129); for
more on Hayek's take on information and cooperation, see Angner (2007). The Binmore
quotation is from Binmore (1999, p. F17).

===== PAGE 273 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 274 =====

PART

Concluding
Remarks

12 Behavioral Welfare Economics,
Libertarian Paternalism, and the
Nudge Agenda

12.1 Introduction

12.2 Behavioral welfare economics

12.3 Libertarian paternalism and the nudge

agenda

12.4 Criticism

12.5 Discussion

13 General Discussion

===== PAGE 275 =====

This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 276 =====

CHAPTER

Behavioral Welfare i 2
Economics, Libertarian
Paternalism, and the

Nudge Agenda

12.1 Introduction

Although behavioral economics was already firmly established as a subdiscipline of economics by the first decade of the twenty-first century, the enterprise appears to have received a boost from the economic crisis that struck
around then. As David Brooks put it in the New York Times: “My sense is that
this financial crisis is going to amount to a coming-out party for behavioral
economists and others who are bringing sophisticated psychology to the
realm of public policy.” Brooks is frequently described as a conservative, but
commentators across the political spectrum have blamed the crisis in part on
inadequate economic models. The former chairman of the Federal Reserve
Alan Greenspan is known as a follower of Ayn Rand’s objectivism, which
celebrates the value of rational self-interest. Yet, in 2008 Congressional testimony, Greenspan said: “I made a mistake in presuming that the self-interests
of organizations, specifically banks and others, were such as that they were
best capable of protecting their own shareholders and their equity in the
firms.” Similarly, the Nobel laureate and liberal economic commentator Paul
Krugman argues:
[Economists] need to abandon the neat but wrong solution of assuming that everyone is rational and markets work perfectly. The vision that emerges as the profession rethinks its foundations may not be all that clear; it certainly won’t be neat; but
we can hope that it will have the virtue of being at least partly right.

Brooks, Greenspan, and Krugman all seem to agree that economic theory can
have a substantial impact on policy and therefore on the quality of people’s
lives. They also seem to agree that this impact can be better or worse depending on the appropriateness of the theory for the task.

Armed with a set of economic theories and a desire to influence policy
and improve lives, behavioral economists have developed a doctrine variously referred to as libertarian, light/soft, or asymmetric paternalism, and
a series of policy proposals collectively referred to as the nudge agenda. To
its advocates, the nudge agenda allows us to improve people’s choices and
thereby their well-being on their own terms at minimal cost and without
interfering with their liberty or autonomy. To its critics, the nudge agenda
represents an ineffective and dangerous intrusion into the sphere of personal

===== PAGE 277 =====

258 Part 6

Concluding Remarks

decision-making by bureaucrats who may be no better at making decisions
than the people whose choices they are trying to improve. In this chapter, we
will review what libertarian paternalism and the nudge agenda are, how their
foundations differ (or not) from those of neoclassical economics, and what
their promises and limitations might be.

12.2 Behavioral welfare economics

There is nothing unusual about the fact that behavioral economists wish to
change, and not only to understand, the world in which they live. Neoclassical
and other economists do too. As Hayek put it in 1933:

It is probably true that economic analysis has never been the product of detached
intellectual curiosity about the why of social phenomena, but of an intense urge
to reconstruct a world which gives rise to profound dissatisfaction. This is as
true of the phylogenesis of economics as the ontogenesis of probably every
economist.

Since behavioral (like neoclassical) economists take their central normative
concern to be welfare, and perhaps its distribution, this work is often discussed under the heading of behavioral welfare economics. Behavioral welfare economics subsumes behavioral law and economics, which incorporates
behavioral economic theories into law and economics, as well as behavioral
public economics, which relies on behavioral economics to describe and evaluate the effects of public policies.

Welfare-enhancing policies take many different forms. Some remove barriers to mutually beneficial interactions, as when free-trade agreements permit coffee growers on one continent to sell their beans to coffee drinkers on
another. Some policies ban harmful actions, which is why it is illegal to steal
other people’s property and to sell your children to the highest bidder; some
mandate beneficial actions, which is why some countries and states require
you to vaccinate your children against preventable diseases. Other policies
impose incentives that encourage people to engage in more beneficial actions
or fewer harmful ones. Thus, tax incentives for environmentally friendly
construction serve to encourage people to build in a more environmentally
responsible way and cigarette taxes (other than bringing in cold, hard cash
for the government) serve to discourage smoking. (It can reasonably be
argued that bans and mandates are just another set of incentives, where the
(dis)incentive takes the form of fines or jail time, but the distinction between
bans/mandates on the one hand and incentives /disincentives on the other is
useful nonetheless.)

Based on their research, behavioral economists have proposed a whole
other form of welfare-enhancing policy intervention. To the extent that people’s actual choices deviate in significant and systematic ways from what they
would have chosen if they had been fully rational, informed, etc., it is at least
in theory possible to improve people’s choices in the sense of making their
actual choices conform more closely to the rational ones. On the assumption

===== PAGE 278 =====

Chapter 12. Behavioral Welfare Economics, Libertarian Paternalism

that people are made better off by whatever they would choose if they were
fully rational, etc., improving people’s choices in this manner means making
them better off. And they are better off by their own lights, that is, as defined
by their own rational and informed preferences. Making people better off in
this manner is, in a nutshell, the goal of libertarian paternalism and the nudge
agenda.

The project is illustrated in Figure 12.1. The person in Figure 12.1(a) is
rational and informed. Her preferences tell her she wants to go from A to B,
and so she does. The person in Figure 12.1(b), if he were rational and informed,
would also want to go from A to B. Unfortunately, he is not. Doing as well as
he can under the circumstances, he goes from A to B’ instead. The libertarian
paternalist, noticing that the person on the right is not as well off as he could
be in terms of his own rational, informed preferences, aspires to change the
conditions under which he makes his decision so that his actions take him
along the shaded line to B instead of B’.

12.3 Libertarian paternalism and the nudge agenda

The fact that we sometimes make suboptimal decisions might suggest that it
would be best if people’s choices were made for them by a third party: a disinterested bureaucrat, perhaps, or an enlightened despot or Leviathan. Yet, no
behavioral economist advocates a dictatorship as a solution. There are many
obvious reasons: bureaucrats and despots will be ignorant about people’s
preferences and the circumstances of their lives, less than fully benevolent,
and on the average no more rational than the people whose choices they are
trying to improve. Moreover, the very act of making decisions ourselves might
enhance our welfare; even making mistakes, if the consequences are not too
severe, can be edifying.

Libertarian paternalism says that it is legitimate to help people make better decisions themselves, by their own lights, if it is possible to do so without interfering with their liberty or autonomy. The approach is described as
“paternalistic” because it aims to make people better off, but “libertarian”
because it tries to make people better off in a manner that respects their liberty and autonomy. Others call it soft or light paternalism, to distinguish it

B
oe

A B A B
{a) Rational, informed behavior {b) Irrational, uninformed behavior

acticmeam Iwo kinds of behavior

259

===== PAGE 279 =====

260 Part 6

Concluding Remarks

from more heavy-handed kinds of paternalism. The term asymmetric paternalism is sometimes used to underscore that soft paternalistic interventions
are expected to impose little to no cost on individuals who are fully rational
and informed, while having potentially large benefits for those who are not.
Interventions designed to have this effect are called nudges. A paradigmatic
nudge has several properties. (i) It aims to help people make better decisions
themselves, rather than making decisions for them. (ii) It imposes little to no
cost on those who are exposed to it. (iii) It has little to no effect on the choices
of those who are already rational and well-informed. (iv) The effect on the
choices of those who are not already rational and well-informed is potentially
beneficial for them, by their own lights.

Figure 12.2 illustrates the manner in which nudges differ from other forms
of policy. What the three traffic signs have in common is that they try to reduce
the number of people who drive straight ahead. But they do so in very different ways. The do-not-enter sign in Figure 12.2(a) represents a ban. It signals
that it is illegal to drive straight ahead, and that doing so is punishable by fines
or jail time. The congestion-charging-zone sign in Figure 12.2(b) represents a
disincentive. It signals that it is legal to continue on, but that anyone who does
so will incur an additional charge. By contrast, the right-turn-ahead sign in
Figure 12.2(c) represents a nudge. The sign does not say that it is illegal to drive
straight ahead; nor does it say that there is a charge associated with doing so.

The right-turn-ahead sign works differently from the other two. (i) The
sign aims to help people make better driving decisions themselves, rather
than making decisions for them. (ii) The sign imposes no cost on people
exposed to it beyond the trivial amount of time it takes for experienced drivers to scan it as part of the environment, and this is true whether they intend
to stay on the road or not. (iii) The sign has no effect on the decisions of
drivers who are rational and informed: with or without the sign, a rational,
informed driver who intends to stay on the road would bear right at the
curve, and a rational, informed driver who intends to drive straight ahead
and off the cliff would do that. (iv) The sign can, however, have an asymmetric and potentially large beneficial effect (by their own lights) on drivers who
are irrational or ignorant of the upcoming turn. To the extent that the sign

& |
(a) Do not enter (b) Congestion charging {c) Right turn ahead
zone

Three kinds of traffic sign. © The Swedish Transport Agency. Used
with permission

===== PAGE 280 =====

Chapter 12. Behavioral Welfare Economics, Libertarian Paternalism

changes the behavior of drivers it is because it “nudges” them into adjusting
the speed and turning the wheel as appropriate.

Exercise 12.1 Traffic signals What kind of policy is represented by (a) a stop
sign; (b) a lane-ending sign; (c) a red light; (d) a yellow light; (e) a parking
meter labeled “¢25 per hour”; and (f) a no-parking sign?

Behavioral welfare economists have proposed a number of specific interventions that they believe are welfare-enhancing, and which are motivated by
theoretical developments in behavioral economics. Here is a small sample:

Default options are options that will be selected in case the decision-maker
fails to make an active choice. Insofar as people are prone to status quo bias,
they will exhibit a tendency to stick with the default even when it would be
virtually costless to make an active decision. By having a choice architect
carefully determine what option should be the default, in light of people’s
own interests, behavioral economists believe that more people will end up
with the option that is best for them.

The Save More Tomorrow (SMarT) Program encourages workers to save
more for retirement by giving them the option of committing in advance to
allocating a portion of their future raises toward savings. Because committing a future raise feels like a foregone gain whereas committing money in
the pocket feels like a loss, prospect theory predicts that workers will find it
easier to save future salary increases than money in the pocket. The SMarT
program is designed to increase savings rates by leveraging this effect.

Cooling-off periods are periods of time following a decision during which
decision-makers have the option to reverse their choices. Cooling-off periods are based on the idea that people in a transient “hot” emotional state
sometimes make suboptimal decisions. Behavioral economists argue that
cooling-off periods offer people the opportunity to reevaluate their decisions from the perspective of a “cool” state, which is likely to lead to a better
decision.

As always, the devil is in the details. If the burden imposed on rational,
informed decision-makers by cooling-off periods, etc., is non-trivial, the intervention would no longer constitute a nudge — whether or not it succeeds in
enhancing total welfare.

Exercise 12.2 Apples or fries? US hamburger chains have started serving
apple slices instead of French fries with their “meal” options. Fries are still
available, but the customer has to ask to have fries substituted for apples.
Preliminary reports suggest that as a result, customers end up eating more
apples and less fries. What kind of intervention is this?

Since the definition of a nudge has some vagueness built into it, we should
expect there to be a grey area where reasonable people can disagree. Yet, it is
easy to think of examples that do not constitute nudges. The weather is not
a nudge, for example, since it is not an intervention. Subliminal advertising

261

===== PAGE 281 =====

262 Part 6

Concluding Remarks

is not a nudge, since if it is effective it may interfere with the choices of the
rational and irrational alike. And as we saw above, stop signs and parking
bans are not nudges.

Exercise 12.3 The Bloomberg ban As part of a 2013 public-health initiative
spearheaded by then-mayor Michael Bloomberg, New York City banned the
sale of sodas larger than 16 ounces (or about 0.5 liters) in restaurants, movie
theaters, and the like. (The law was later struck down by the state’s highest
court.) Explain why the “Bloomberg ban” does not constitute a nudge.

Any argument to the effect that some intervention is or is not welfareenhancing presupposes a welfare criterion: a rule that (at least in principle)
allows us to determine who is well off and who is not. Neoclassical economics
relies on a preference-based criterion, according to which people are well off
to the extent that their preferences are satisfied. Given the neoclassical understanding of “utility,” this is equivalent to saying that people are well off to the
extent that their utility is high. It has been argued that behavioral economics entails that this criterion is inadequate and that we must instead accept a
happiness-based criterion, according to which people are well off to the extent
that they are happy. Notice that these criteria are substantially different, since
it is possible to have satisfied preferences without being happy and vice versa.
Others maintain that it is possible to maintain the preference-based criterion
by assuming (as some neoclassical economists already do) that the preferences
that count are not the preferences actually revealed in people’s choices, but
the preferences that they would have if they were perfectly rational, ideally
informed, and so on.

12.4 Criticism

The appeal of libertarian paternalism and the nudge agenda is obvious: Would
it not be wonderful if people could be helped to make better decisions themselves, even by their own lights, without interfering with their liberty and
autonomy? Proponents are enthusiastic indeed. They point out that nudges can
be cheap to administer, that results can be immediate, and that the effects can be
large. The right-turn-ahead sign in Figure 12.2(c) is a case in point: presumably
these signs are so common because the cost of putting them up and maintaining them is low, they begin to operate immediately, and expected benefits in
terms of reduced car crashes are high. Harvard Law professor Cass R. Sunstein,
one of the names most strongly associated with the nudge agenda, writes:

In the context of retirement planning, automatic enrollment has proved exceedingly
effective in promoting and increasing savings. In the context of consumer behavior,
disclosure requirements and default rules have protected consumers against serious
economic harm, saving many millions of dollars. Simplification of financial aid forms
can have the same beneficial effect ... as thousands of dollars in additional aid (per
student) ... In some cases, nudges have a larger impact than more expensive and more
coercive tools.

===== PAGE 282 =====

Chapter 12. Behavioral Welfare Economics, Libertarian Paternalism

It is worth pointing out that nudging is not limited to governments.
Corporations, charities, religious organizations, managers, teachers, and parents can all use nudges to help people make better decisions, by their own
lights. And many of them already do.

Example 12.4 Google Google wants to encourage its employees to eat
healthily. Fast Company reports: “In pursuit of that healthiness, happiness, and
innovation, the software giant has turned to ‘nudges’: simple, subtle cues that
prompt people to make better decisions.” Borrowing ideas from behavioral
economics, Google is now: (1) putting candy in opaque bins rather than clear
dispensers; (2) placing salad in full view to people entering the cafeteria and
dessert much further down; (3) encouraging people to use smaller plates by
pointing out that people with bigger plates tend to eat more; (4) color-coding
foods in accordance with how healthy they are; and more. All these interventions can plausibly be characterized as nudges as we understand the term here.

Problem 12.5 Identify three features of your car, computer, or any other device
that constitute nudges.

So when it comes to libertarian paternalism and the nudge agenda, what is
not to love? Of course, every tool can be used badly. A hammer is a wonderful
thing if you have to drive nails, but it can cause a lot of damage if swung in the
vicinity of crystal glass or human heads. Similarly, nudges can presumably be
inelegant, inappropriate, misguided, mean-spirited, and/or outright harmful.
But just like it would be unhelpful to criticize the use of hammers based on
the fact that people get hurt if they are whacked over the head, it would be
odd to criticize nudges based on the fact that they have harmful uses. For a
general critique of nudging to get traction, the critique needs to make the case
that nudges are harmful to human welfare (or autonomy, or whatever) even
when used correctly.

Critics point out that the people doing the nudging — the “choice architects,” in Sunstein’s lingo — will themselves be lacking in rationality and
information, not to mention benevolence. Yet, the objection misses the point.
Behavioral economists are well aware of the fact that policy-makers suffer the
same limitations as the rest of us do. Not only is this the reason why behavioral economists rejected the dictatorship solution, but it is part of the reason
why they developed the nudge agenda in the first place. And choice architects
need not be superhuman. Consider the right-turn-ahead sign again. Posting
such a sign does not mean that you pretend to know what is good for people,
that you want to impose your vision of the good life on them, or even that
you are telling them what is good for them; you can post the sign even if you
recognize that some people have reason to drive straight ahead. And posting
such a sign does not mean that you are deluded into thinking that you are
more rational, better informed, or more benevolent than anybody else. It just
means that you think there is a chance that the sign will help some people who
want to stay on the road to do so.

Some critics argue that all forms of paternalism are objectionable (offensive, illegitimate) and that, therefore, libertarian paternalism is too. But this

263

===== PAGE 283 =====

264 Part 6

Concluding Remarks

criticism equivocates on the meaning of the term “paternalism.” If by “paternalism” we mean the disposition or desire to make others better off, there is
nothing objectionable about it; paternalism in this sense is what is otherwise
known as “benevolence” and it is widely considered a virtue. In this sense of
“paternalism,” increasing total welfare by removing trade barriers is a paternalistic intervention and virtually every welfare economist is a paternalist. The
sense in which paternalism is objectionable is the sense in which it entails a
violation of people’s liberty or autonomy, and libertarian paternalism by definition does not. In fact, when Sunstein notes that nudging may be more effective than more coercive forms of policy, he is raising the possibility that the
same or better results can be attained by substituting the former for the latter.
If so, nudging would actually increase people’s freedom of choice. Libertarian
economist Bryan Caplan has endorsed the nudge agenda to the extent that it
substitutes softer for harder forms of paternalism. He writes:

“Nudging” is a great idea. We should start by ending existing hard paternalism in
favor of gentle (or even subliminal) persuasion. Instead of prohibiting drugs, we
should allow anyone who wants to use currently illegal drugs to go to a government website to request an Authorized Narcotics User Card ... Analogous opt-out
rules should be devised for government health care programs, worker protection
laws, consumer protection laws, and so on.

At any rate, to the extent that we are concerned with objectionable forms of
paternalism, it would be more motivated to target policies that actually do
interfere with people’s liberty and autonomy — such as the bans and mandates represented by Figure 12.2(a) and the (dis)incentives represented by
Figure 12.2(b) - and there are plenty of them already.

Other critics allege that the nudge agenda is dangerous because there is
a slippery slope from perfectly innocuous nudges to more coercive forms
of policy. If we allow policy-makers to nudge us at all, even in ways that
do not violate our liberty and autonomy, the argument goes, policy-makers
will soon engage in more coercive forms of policy. It is quite true that all
policy interventions (even those that aim to remove barriers to mutually
beneficial interaction and to enhance freedom of choice) can have unintended and unanticipated adverse consequences. It is also true that the wolf
of hard paternalism may appear in the clothing of soft-paternalist sheep.
But there is something odd about the slippery-slope argument. Note that
it does not say that there is anything wrong with libertarian paternalism
or nudging per se, but rather with the harder forms of paternalistic intervention that will likely follow. But why should we think that they will?
Consider traffic signs of the third type. The critic alleges that allowing the
use of signs of the third type will necessarily or likely lead to a proliferation
of signs of the first two kinds. But there seems little reason to think this is so.
Indeed, to the extent that signs of the third kind work, they may obviate the
need for signs of the first two kinds. This is the thought underlying Caplan
and Sunstein’s hope that soft paternalism will lead to an expansion of personal freedom. Again, given that signs of the first two kinds are already in
widespread use, to the extent that we are concerned about limitations of

===== PAGE 284 =====

Chapter 12. Behavioral Welfare Economics, Libertarian Paternalism

liberty and autonomy, our time would be better spent arguing against them.
instead. Considerations like this have encouraged philosophers to reject all
slippery-slope arguments. Moral philosopher Simon Blackburn, for example, writes: “Slippery slope’ reasoning needs to be resisted, not just here
but everywhere.”

A very different kind of criticism comes from within behavioral economics itself. Some behavioral economists have cautioned that nudging
has sharp limitations, and that other forms of policy may be necessary to
solve many policy challenges. Thus, George Loewenstein and Peter Ubel
have argued that a wide variety of problems — including the obesity epidemic, conflicts of interest in medicine, and the challenge of energy preservation — are best addressed using more traditional forms of policy. They
continue:

As policymakers use it to devise programs, it’s becoming clear that behavioral
economics is being asked to solve problems it wasn’t meant to address. Indeed, it
seems in some cases that behavioral economics is being used as a political expedient, allowing policymakers to avoid painful but more effective solutions rooted in
traditional economics.

In terms of traffic signs, the point here is that there are conditions under which
signs of the first two kinds in Figure 12.2 are called for, and that signs of the
third kind (though potentially effective under a limited range of conditions)
cannot be expected to replace them. Loewenstein and Ubel could bolster their
claim by pointing out that more heavy-handed policies often serve not to benefit the decision-maker, but to prevent him or her from harming others. To
deal with things like theft, assault, and murder, outright bans — not nudges
—are particularly appealing. Either way, unlike Caplan and perhaps Sunstein,
then, Loewenstein and Ubel think the nudge agenda should be seen as a complement to, rather than a substitute for, traditional forms of policy.

12.5 Discussion

The notion that economic theory can have a real impact on worldly events was
wholeheartedly endorsed by Keynes, who wrote:

[The] ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right
and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood.
Indeed the world is ruled by little else. Practical men, who believe themselves to
be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some
defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back. I am sure that
the power of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the gradual
encroachment of ideas ... it is ideas, not vested interests, which are dangerous for
good or evil.

The ideas of behavioral economists are no exception. How exactly behavioral
economics will affect “practical” women and men remains to be seen. Yet, it is
not too early to draw some interim conclusions.

265

===== PAGE 285 =====

266 Part 6

Concluding Remarks

First off, the terms behavioral economists chose to discuss their policy
proposals could probably have been chosen more wisely. The appropriation of the term “paternalism” in particular has invited many misguided
responses. It would appear that Thaler and Sunstein had hoped to appeal to
the union of libertarians and paternalists, but instead ended up appealing to
their intersection — which is a small subset indeed. The discussion might have
been less heated if they instead had used an unsexy term such as ergonomics or human-factors engineering. They could have done so without great
loss, since ergonomics is defined as “the scientific discipline concerned with
the understanding of interactions among humans and other elements of a
system, and the profession that applies theory, principles, data and methods
to design in order to optimize human well-being and overall system performance.” Economist Raj Chetty has suggested we think of the nudge agenda
in terms of model uncertainty: as a solution to a problem that arises when we
do not know what model best captures the behaviors of the people involved.
Assuming that neoclassical (optimizing) agents are insensitive to nudges
while no behavioral agent is harmed and at least one of them is made better
off, nudging becomes a weakly dominant strategy. I like to think of the nudge
agenda as an effort to make social institutions, retirement plans, health-care
systems, etc., robust under predictable variations in rationality. Thus, it is possible to think of the agenda as an effort to make social and other institutions
trembling-hand perfect, as it were (see Section 10.4).

Once the conceptual confusion has been cleared up, it seems that the
debate has been needlessly amped up. When used correctly and carefully,
there is little reason to think that a nudge (such as the right-turn-ahead sign)
needs to be dangerous, sneaky, or intrusive, and the fact that choice architects
are mere mortals is no show-stopper. We have no reason to fear a slippery
slope to harder kinds of paternalism; indeed, the nudge agenda may even
expand the sphere of personal liberty. (We do need to be alert to unintended
and unanticipated adverse consequences and to wolves in sheep’s clothing,
but that is true for all policy proposals.) That said, the enthusiasm among the
biggest proponents of the nudge agenda is probably unwarranted. When even
fellow behavioral economists ask proponents to hold their horses, we should
at most be cautiously optimistic.

Most importantly, the debate about libertarian paternalism and the nudge
agenda has been unhelpfully framed. The question is not whether people who
design cars, phones, retirement plans, and health-care systems should nudge
or not. Your car is full of nudges - such as the fasten-the-seat-belt indicator —
and it would make little sense to demand that car manufacturers or anybody
else cease to use them when they work. The real question, instead, is whether
nudges should be used as complements to or substitutes for other forms of
policy in the interest of attaining legitimate policy goals. But the answer to
this question depends both on what the legitimate policy goals are — which
can only be established by means of philosophical analysis — as well as about
empirical facts about the efficacy of nudges — which can only be established
by means of systematic, empirical research. And on these two questions, the
jury is still out.

===== PAGE 286 =====

Chapter 12 Behavioral Welfare Economics, Libertarian Paternalism 267

FURTHER READING

The quotations in the introductory section are from Brooks (2008), who cites Greenspan,
and Krugman (2009, p. 43). Hayek (1933, pp. 122-2) discusses the phylogenesis and
ontogenesis of economists. Thaler and Sunstein (2008) is the go-to source about the
nudge agenda; Sunstein (2014) helpfully catalogues ten nudges (pp. 585-87) and
supplied the block quotation at the beginning of Section 12.4 (p. 584). Welfare criteria
in economics are discussed in Angner (2015). Caplan (2013) defends nudges from a
libertarian perspective; Blackburn (2001, p. 64) dismisses slippery-slope reasoning; and
Loewenstein and Ubel (2010) caution against the over-reliance on nudges. The passage from Keynes appears in The General Theory of Employment, interest and Money
(Keynes, 1936, pp. 383-84). The connection to human-factors engineering was suggested by Robin Hogarth (personal communication); the term “ergonomics” is defined by
the International Ergonomics Association (2015). Chetty (2015) suggests we think of the
nudge agenda in terms of model uncertainty.

===== PAGE 287 =====

CHAPTER

13 General Discussion

If the upshot of the previous chapter is correct, there may be little difference in the normative foundations of neoclassical and behavioral economics;
the difference when it comes to policy proposals by and large reflects differences in descriptive theory. This, then, brings us to the question of how to
assess the relative merits of neoclassical and behavioral economics. It is not
my intention to try to settle the argument here. A proper assessment would
require a thorough discussion of experimental and other methods, statistical methodology, and interpretation of a wide range of empirical results. All
this is beyond the scope of this book, which (as explained in the Preface) is
primarily an exercise in exposition. Yet, in the preceding chapters, the aim
has been to offer some indication of what is at stake in the debate between
behavioral and neoclassical economists, as well as what a proper assessment
would look like.

One important insight is that neoclassical economics is not as silly as some
of its critics make it out to be, and that many of the objections against the
enterprise are misguided. As we saw in Section 11.2, for example, observed
behavior in the ultimatum game is perfectly consistent with Nash equilibrium
predictions. And Sections 2.6 and 11.2 have shown that neoclassical economics
does not say that people are selfish, materialistic, greedy, or anything of the
sort. Thus, attacks on what some critics have called the “selfishness axiom” of
neoclassical economics are misguided not just in the sense that selfishness is
not an axiom in the calculus, but in the sense that selfishness is not implied
by the theory. Relatedly, standard theory does not say that people relentlessly
pursue their own happiness or pleasure, meaning that any criticism based on
the assumption that it does is inevitably flawed. Moreover, as Sections 4.7 and
6.6 indicate, the standard approach does not say that people (consciously or
not) perform any sort of calculations in their head. Thus, any criticism premised on the notion that most people are unable, for example, to apply Bayes’s
theorem in their head is misguided.

For practical purposes, economists have no choice but to use additional
assumptions, often called auxiliary assumptions, in conjunction with their
theories. In order to make substantive predictions, for example, the theorist
might need to make more specific assumptions about what, exactly, people
have preferences over, and how, exactly, these preferences order the available
options. Depending on context, auxiliary assumptions might say that people
only care about their own payoffs in dollar terms. The auxiliary assumptions
need to be justified on independent grounds, and the justification may or may
not be convincing. Such auxiliary assumptions, though, form no essential part
of the neoclassical enterprise and can easily be replaced by others.

===== PAGE 288 =====

Chapter 13 General Discussion

A no less important insight, however, is that anecdotal, experimental,
and field evidence all suggest that people’s observed behavior deviates from.
neoclassical theory in predictable fashion. There is little doubt that people
(sometimes) do things such as honoring sunk costs, relying on adaptive but
imperfect heuristics, violating the sure-thing principle, acting impulsively,
and exhibiting limited strategic thinking. If deviations were random and
unsystematic, they would (for many purposes) be theoretically uninteresting.
In fact, however, deviations are frequently substantial and systematic, which
means that they are predictable and can be captured by using a descriptive,
scientific theory. At a fundamental level, behavioral economics is the result of
this insight. The fact that people’s behavior is irrational does not mean that it
is unpredictable, nor that it cannot be described using scientific means.

The models developed by behavioral economists can be challenged on various grounds. For one thing, it is possible that future studies will reveal that
the models were based on inadequate data. Recently, psychology has been
thrown into a so-called “replication crisis” as several apparently well-established results have turned out to be hard to replicate. This is obviously bad
news for the results — and for the individual researchers who produced them —
but it is not necessarily a problem for psychology: what makes science different
from other kinds of human activity is that it is supposed to be open to revision
in light of new data. While behavioral economists are by and large confident
that their empirical results will hold up, chances are that at least some of them.
will not. Again, this is how science works. A challenger can also point out that
it is sometimes possible, when the results hold up under scrutiny, to accommodate these results within the standard framework, either by redescribing
the choices available to the agent or by admitting additional arguments into
the utility function. And it is important not to attribute irrationality to people
when their behavior is better described as consistent with standard theory.
That said, neoclassical economists frequently bend over backwards to accommodate empirical results in a manner that is both artificial and ad hoc. In the
interest of defending standard theory, orthodox economists sometimes cook
up a contorted — so-called “exotic” — utility function that after the fact makes
observed behavior consistent with the neoclassical utility-maximization nartative, though it is not supported by any other independent evidence. It is
often both simpler and more plausible to infer that people sometimes are in
violation of standard theory.

Some neoclassical economists, as we have seen, are happy to admit that this
is so. In defense of analytical game theory, as we know from Section 11.5, it has
been argued that neoclassical theory is only intended to apply under sharply
circumscribed conditions. Of course, this defense of neoclassical economics
does not constitute an argument against behavioral economics. Instead, this
response might offers a way to reconcile neoclassical and behavioral economics. Many behavioral economists are happy to admit that observed behavior
sometimes approaches or coincides with neoclassical predictions under certain conditions. But if those conditions do not hold, neoclassical economists
should be able to agree that a non-neoclassical theory is required to explain
and predict behavior. This is the domain of behavioral economics.

269

===== PAGE 289 =====

270 Part 6

Concluding Remarks

Note that nothing prevents behavioral economists from continuing to use
neoclassical models for various purposes. Behavioral economists are glad to
admit that neoclassical models sometimes do a great job of capturing observed
choices. In fact, this is part of the reason why neoclassical models often survive as special cases of a more general behavioral model. Thus, the exponential discounting function (from Section 8.3) survives as a special case of the
hyperbolic one (from Section 9.2): just set beta to one and the latter reduces
to the former. There is nothing inconsistent about this. But there is an interesting asymmetry between neoclassical and behavioral economics. Postwar
neoclassical orthodoxy insists that economics must rid itself of all ties to psychology — hedonic and otherwise (see Section 1.2). An economist committed
to this view cannot consistently help himself or herself to theories making
references to things “in the head” whenever it is convenient to do so. In this
respect too, behavioral economics has a distinct advantage over its neoclassical counterpart.

Science progresses in fits and starts. Rather than a steady progression
of darkness to light, science tends to offer a series of increasingly complex
models that capture to a greater or a lesser extent empirical phenomena that
for whatever reason attract scientists’ interest. The “final” theory is likely to
remain out of reach. The same is true of economics. In Worstward Ho, Samuel
Beckett wrote: “Ever tried. Ever failed. No matter. Try again. Fail again. Fail
better.” To use Beckett’s phrase, progress in science in general and economics in particular can be thought of as a matter of failing better. Incidentally,
Beckett might just as well have been describing the study of science, which
is never finished, or the writing of textbooks, which can always be improved.
To what extent do behavioral economists fail better than neoclassical economists? I do not pretend to have the answer. But I do hope to have shed some
light on the nature of both neoclassical and behavioral economics, and to have
underscored some of the power and promise of economic analysis of social
phenomena.

FURTHER READING

Worstward Ho, first published in 1983, is included in Nohow On (Beckett, 1989); the quotation appears on p. 101. Behavioral economists’ use of neoclassical theory is discussed
at length in Angner (no date). For a deeper discussion about the nature of behavioral
economics, its strengths and weaknesses, see Davis (2011) and Ross (2005). For a more
advanced textbook, see Wilkinson and Klaes (201 2).

===== PAGE 290 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

Chapter 1
Exercise 1.1 (a) Descriptive. (b) Normative. (c) Descriptive.

Exercise 1.3 (a) 100. (b) $400,000. (c) $242 (see Section 8.2).

Chapter 2
Exercise 2.1 (a) fBn. (b) nBf. (c) nBn.

Exercise 2.2 {Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, ...,
Zimbabwe}. Any order is fine, but the curly brackets are part of a correct
answer. Notice that if you were to spell it out, this would be a pretty long list.

Exercise 2.3 (a) In all likelihood: d > r. (b) In all likelihood: r> d.

Exercise 2.7 (a) Intransitive, incomplete. (b) Transitive, incomplete.
(c) Transitivity depends on whether we consider half-siblings; either way,
it is incomplete. (d) Intransitive, incomplete. (e) Transitive, incomplete.
(f) Transitive, incomplete. (g) Transitive, incomplete.

Exercise 2.8 If the enemy of your enemy is not your enemy, then “is the
enemy of” is intransitive.

Exercise 2.9 (a) Transitive, complete. (b) Transitive, incomplete.
(c) Transitive, incomplete. (d) Transitive, incomplete.

Exercise 2.10 (a) Transitivity implies that if apples are at least as good as
bananas, and bananas are at least as good as starvation, then apples are at
least as good as starvation, that if starvation is at least as good as bananas,
and bananas are at least as good as apples, then starvation is at least as good
as apples; and so on. (b) Completeness implies that either apples are at least
as good as bananas or bananas are at least as good as apples, but also that
apples are at least as good as apples, and that bananas are at least as good as
bananas.

Exercise 2.13 Assume that x > y & y ~ z. The fact that y ~ zimplies that y > z.
Given thatx>y & y =z, it follows that x > z.

===== PAGE 291 =====

272 Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 2.14 Here are the complete proofs.

(a) lLxe~y&y~z&z~p

2x~Z
3.x ~p

ax~y&y~z&z~p>x~p QED

(b) l.x~y&y~z&z~p

2x ey&yex
3.yFzZezey
AzepepFz
5.x FZ
6.x 2p
7.22%
8.p ex
9x~p

ax~y&y~z&z~p>x~p QED

by assumption
from (1), by transitivity of ~
from (1) & (2), by transitivity of ~

by assumption

from (1), by definition of ~

from (1), by definition of ~

from (1), by definition of ~

from (2) & (3), by transitivity of >
from (4) & (5), by transitivity of >
from (2) & (3), by transitivity of >
from (3) & (7), by transitivity of >
from (6) & (8), by definition of ~

Exercise 2.17 Here is the complete proof of Proposition 2.16(i). What this
exercise calls the first part is lines (2)-(4).

1 x>y&y>z
2. xFy& wyFx
3. yRz&eazey
A, xBzZ

5. ZX

6. yFx

7 OL

8. AZ Ex

9 x>Z

x>y&y>z7x>z QED

by assumption

from (1), by definition of >

from (1), by definition of >

from (1) and (2), by transitivity of >

by assumption, for proof by contradiction
from (3) and (5), by transitivity of >

from (2) and (6)

from (5)+{7), by contradiction

from (4) and (8), by definition of >

Exercise 2.18 Assume, for proof by contradiction, that “is the enemy of”
is in fact transitive. That means that whenever A is the enemy of B, and B is
the enemy of C, A must be the enemy of C. But assuming that the enemy of
the enemy of a person is his or her friend, that is impossible. Therefore, “is the

enemy of” is not transitive.

Exercise 2.19 Here is the proof:

1 x>x

2. xEx&axEx
3. °«L

aX > x

by assumption

from (1), by definition of >
from (2)

QED

===== PAGE 292 =====

Appendix: Answer Key 273

Exercise 2.20 Here is the complete proof:

2: PNT YN

x>y &y Pz

xey& yx

XZ

ZX

YFX

an

ZX

x>Z

x>y ey FzZox>z

Exercise 2.21 See below:

{a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

lx>y
2x2 y&eryex
3.x Fy
OL PY ey

La>y
2x2 y&eryex
3. ny Fx
“XY DIY EX

lxPy

2y>x
S.yex&rxney
41

5.ny>x

ok yory > x

lx>y

2x~y

3.x y&ryex
4x ey&yFx
5.1

6.45x~y

“xX >yoax~y

lix~y

2x>y

3.x y&yFx
4x ey&ryFx
5.1

6.45% >y

A X~YDOIAK>Yy

by assumption

from (1), by definition of >

from (1) and (2), by transitivity of >
by assumption, for proof by contradiction
from (1) and (4), by transitivity of >
from (2) and (5)

from (4)-(6), by contradiction

from (3) and (7), by definition of >
QED

by assumption

from (1), by definition of >
from (2), by logic

QED

by assumption

from (1), by definition of >
from (2), by logic

QED

by assumption
by assumption, for proof by contradiction
from (2), by definition of >
from (1) & (3)

from (2)-(4), by contradiction
QED

by assumption
by assumption, for proof by contradiction
from (1), by definition of >
from (2), by definition of ~
from (3) & (4)

from (2)-(5), by contradiction
QED

by assumption
by assumption, for proof by contradiction
from (1), by definition of ~
from (2), by definition of >
from (3) & (4)

from (2)-(5), by contradiction
QED

===== PAGE 293 =====

274 Appendix: Answer Key

(f) l.nxey by assumption
2x Eyvy Fx by completeness
3.y BX from (1) & (2), by logic
Ik EY Sy ex QED

(g) Laxey by assumption
2x Eyvy Fx by completeness
3.y BX from (1) & (2), by logic
Ay>x from (1) & (3), by definition of >
aK Ry syrx QED

(h) l.ax>y by assumption
2.5 (x=y& 7y2=x) from (1), by definition of >
3.4x Fyvy ex from (2), by logic
Ay>x from (3), by part (f) above
aXe YY ex QED

Exercise 2.22 Begin by assuming what is to the left of the arrow, in this case
x~ y & y ~ z. Then, ona separate line, assume (for a proof by contradiction)
the opposite of what you are trying to prove; that is, assume that x > z. Finally,
derive a contradiction.

Exercise 2.23 (a) Begin by assuming that -x>y and that sy>z. Apply
Proposition 2.21(g) twice to get y > x and z > y. Transitivity will yield z > x,
which by Proposition 2.21(b) gives you the result sx > z. (b) Begin by assuming that -x > y and that -y > z. Proposition 2.21(h) applied twice, transitivity,
and 2.21(c) will give you the result.

Exercise 2.24 The answer is, of course, that f* > c. Begin by assuming that
f~c &f* > f. You need to prove two things: that ft > c and that sc > f*. After
using the definitions of indifference and strict preference, the first part follows
by transitivity of weak preference. For the second part, assume (for a proof by
contradiction) that c > ft.

Exercise 2.25 A rational person is indifferent. Because c, ~ ¢, & ¢, ~ Cy
Proposition 2.14 implies that c, ~ c,. Because, in addition, c, ~ c,, the same proposition implies that c, ~ c, and so on. Ultimately, you will find that ¢, ~ C45). QED.

Exercise 2.26 Assume that x>y &y>z&z>x. Apply the definition of
strict preference a few times, and a contradiction is immediate.

Exercise 2.27 Assume that x > y & y =z & z= x, Use the transitivity of weak
preference and the definition of indifference to establish that x ~ y&y~z&
Z~X.

===== PAGE 294 =====

Appendix: Answer Key 275

Exercise 2.28 See Figure A.1.

Exercise 2.30 The new menu would be {nothing at all, soup, salad,
chicken, beef, soup-and-chicken, soup-and-beef, salad-and-chicken, salad-

and-beef}.
Bananas | \

4 Apples

Bananas N

4 Apples

Milk

4

3

2

1
1 2 38 4 5 6 Tea

Indifference curves

===== PAGE 295 =====

276 Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 2.31 See Figure A.2.

Bananas IS

4 Apples

Bananas
6
5
4
3
2
1

4 Apples

Bananas
5
4
3
2
1

6 Apples
(c}

lm Figure A.2 | Budget lines

===== PAGE 296 =====

Appendix: Answer Key 277

Exercise 2.35 In order to prove this proposition, you need to do two things.
First, assume that x ~ y and prove that u(x) = u(y). Second, assume that u(x) =
u(y) and prove that x ~ y. Here is the complete proof:

1. x~y by assumption

2. xBy&yPx from (1), by definition of ~

3. u(x) = uy) & uly) = u(x). from (2), by definition of u(-) (twice)

4. u(x)=uly) from (3), by math

5. u(x) = uly) by assumption

6. u(x) = uly) & uly) = u(x) from (5), by math

7. xBy&yFx from (6), by definition of u(-) (twice)

8 x~y from (4) and (8), by definition of ~
x ~ ys u(x) =uly) QED

Exercise 2.36 (a) Neoclassical economic agents are assumed to be
“rational”— which is used in a technical sense quite different from that of
“intelligent” and “analytic” in everyday speech — and there is no assumption
that they are selfish. Classical economic agents, like those who appear in the
work of Adam Smith (see Section 1.2) are not assumed to be rational, intelligent, analytic, or selfish — although they may be on occasion. (b) The notion
that money makes people happy is no part of fundamental economic theory.
To the extent that people prefer more money to less, we can say that money
gives them utility. But the concept of utility has no essential connection to
happiness.

Exercise 2.37 See Table A.1.

Table A.1_ Properties of weak preference, indifference, and strong preference

Property Definition = ~ >
(a) Transitivity xRy & yRz > xRz (for all x, y, z) v v v
(b) Completeness xRy v yRx (for all x, y) v
(c) _ Reflexivity xRx (for all x) ¥ ¥
(d) _ Irreflexivity axRx (for all x) v
(e) Symmetry xRy — yRx (for all x, y) ¥
(f) Anti-symmetry xRy— —yRx (for all x, y) v

Exercise 2.38 (a) “is not married to” (b) “is married to.” (c) both. (d) neither.
(e) neither.

Exercise 2.39 Omitted.

Exercise 2.40 (a) She violates completeness. (b) He violates transitivity. (c) It
violates completeness.

===== PAGE 297 =====

278 Appendix: Answer Key

Chapter 3
Exercise 3.1 (a) See Figure A.3. (b) $1000. (c) $1000.

Buy stocks
Buy real estate

Buy bonds

Investment problem

Exercise 3.3 (a) See Figure A.4.
a ,7 (9)
2-1)
3 (9)
4 (9)

9 (7)
_Megelieweee Opportunity costs

Exercise 3.6 The answers will depend on your preferences, but they could
be (a) the most fulfilling relationship you could have instead, (b) the course
of study that excites you most, and (c) the most satisfying activity you could
engage in instead of sleeping in the morning.

Exercise 3.7 For highly paid people, the opportunity cost of mowing lawns,
etc., is greater.

Exercise 3.10 You may be ignoring the fact that there are better things you
could spend $60 on, including a $10 meal and 50 dollars’ worth of other fun
or useful things.

Exercise 3.11 If a person is willing to do “whatever it takes” to attain some
goal, that means he or she is willing to ignore all opportunity costs — which is
irrational.

Exercise 3.13 Not necessarily: if another, even more successful campaign to
boost revenue were available to you at the time, it would have been irrational
to invest in the advertising campaign.

===== PAGE 298 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 3.14 No: military action is associated with huge explicit and
implicit costs, which are often underestimated by its advocates.

Exercise 3.17 See Figure A.5.

Hold
Asset 40
underperformed

Sell
#1

Hold

Asset

overperformed #3

Sell

(a)

Marry him
Dated dude yo
for years

Leave him
#1

Marry him

Did not date

dude for years ,
Leave him

(b)

| Figure A.5 | Sunk costs, again

Exercise 3.19 The difference between the cheese you manage to throw away
and the one you do not is that the former is not associated with a sunk cost,
whereas the latter is.

Exercise 3.20 Sign up for the course at the public university. The tuition
already paid to the liberal arts college is a sunk cost.

Exercise 3.27 (a) You would want to put it in area B. (b) Before.

Exercise 3.28 (a) Show a property that is not in as good shape as and even
farther from the office than the first property, but which is still in better shape
than the second property. (b) Show a property that is in even worse shape
and slightly farther from the office than the second property, but which is still
closer to the office than the first property.

Exercise 3.29 If the third-party politician C promises neither higher nor
lower taxes but massive cuts to public services, he will be asymmetrically
dominated by A, as intended.

Exercise 3.30 (a) Choose a wingman or wingwoman who is less desirable
than you are along all relevant dimensions, but who beats each competitor

279

===== PAGE 299 =====

280 Appendix: Answer Key

along at least one dimension. (b} You want your wingman or wingwoman to
fall in the 8-9 range (exclusive) both with respect to attractiveness and intelligence. (c) He or she thinks you are less desirable than he or she is along all
relevant dimensions.

Exercise 3.31 You would need to sell a vehicle that is super-fast and superunsafe: something like a rocket-propelled bicycle.

Exercise 3.32 The third-party politician must promise even lower taxes, and
even greater cuts to public services than politician A.

Exercise 3.36 From the point of view of the waitress without a car, the value
of getting one is the value of going from 0 to +1. In terms of value, this amounts
to going from v(0) = 0 to o(+1) = 0.5. The change, therefore, is v(+1)—v(0) =
0.5. From the point of view of the waitress with a car, the value of losing one is
the value of going from 0 to —1 cars. In terms of value, that amounts to going
from 0(0) = 0 to v(-1) = —2. The change, then, is v(—1) — 0(0) = —2-0 = —2.
The total change for a person experiencing the gain and the loss is 0.5 + (—2) =
0.5 — 2 = —1.5. This amounts to a loss of 1.5 units of value, leaving her worse
off than she was before the sequence of events took place.

Exercise 3.37 In value terms, gaining $6 and losing $4 amounts to a change
in value terms of v(+6) + o(-4) =3 —-8 5 . In value terms, that is as bad
as suffering a loss of $2.5, since v(—2.5) = —5, in spite of the fact that you are
left with $2 more than you had at the outset.

Exercise 3.38 (a) In terms of deviations from a reference point of $0, the drop
in price corresponds to a drop from +1 to 0. In value terms, that corresponds
toa drop from v(+1) = 0.5 to 0(0) = 0. So the change in value is v(0) — o(+1) =
0 —0.5 = —0.5. (b) In terms of deviations from a reference point of $1, the drop
in price corresponds to a drop from 0 to —1. In value terms, that corresponds
to a drop from v(0) = 0 to v(—1) = —2. So the change in value is v(—1) — v(0)
= —2-—0= —2. (c) With a reference point of $0, you experience a loss of 0.5
units of value; with a reference point of $1, you experience a loss of 2 units of
value. Since a loss of 2 is worse than a loss of 0.5, using a reference point of $1
makes you feel worse than a reference point of $0.

Exercise 3.39 (a) Given her reference point of $12, Alicia thinks of the price
drop from $17 to $12 as a change from +5 to 0. The change in value terms
is v(0) — v(+5) = 0 — 2.5 = —2.5, meaning a loss of 2.5. (b) Given her reference point of $17, Benice thinks of the price drop as a drop from 0 to —5. The
change in value terms is v(—5) — v(0) 10-0 10, meaning a loss of
10. (c) Given her reference point of $10, Charlie thinks of the price drop as a
change from +7 to +2. The change in value terms is v(2) — 0(7) = 1 — 3.5 =
—2.5, meaning a loss of 2.5. (d) Benice is most disappointed.

Exercise 3.40 (a) 50. (b) 200. (c) The net effect is —150. (d) Bad.

Exercise 3.41 (a) Alex thought of the $2 as a foregone gain, so for him the
absolute value of the $2 was 1. Mathematically, the change in value can be

===== PAGE 300 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

computed as v(0) — 0(+2) = 0 — 2/2 = —1. (b) Bob thought of the $2 as a loss,
so for him the absolute value of the $2 was 4. Mathematically, the change in
value can be computed as (—2) — v(0) 4-0 A. (c) Bob.

Exercise 3.42 To people who do not bring their own mugs the discount
seems like a foregone gain, whereas a penalty would feel like an actual loss.
Since foregone gains are easier to stomach, customers are less likely to be alienated this way.

Exercise 3.43 A person who does not expect a raise would experience v(+5).
A person who does expect a raise would experience v(—5). See Figure A.6 for
a graphical representation of the difference.

mI Figure A.6 | pum The raise

Exercise 3.44 (a) v(+93 — 75) = 0(+18) = 9. (b) 0(+67 — 75) = o(—-8) 16.
(c) The theory would suggest that you should set low expectations and perform well.

Exercise 3.45 The theory would suggest that you should surround yourself
with low-paid people and make a lot of money.

Exercise 3.47 See Figure A.7.

Exercise 3.48 (a) Status quo bias would entail that Europeans would tend
to favor the European system while Americans would tend to favor the
American system. The bias is driven by loss aversion. For Europeans, the loss
of government-provided health care would not be outweighed by the gain
in disposable income; for Americans, the loss of disposable income would
not be outweighed by the gain in government-provided health care. (b) See
Figure A.8. (c) Loss aversion suggests that after adaptation has occurred,
Americans would be unwilling to give up the new system, and the opposition
party would find it difficult to engineer a return to the old one.

281

===== PAGE 301 =====

282 Appendix: Answer Key

Bananas

123 4 5 6 Apples
(b)

Im Figure A.7 | Value function and indifference curve

American
indifference
curve

Disposable
income

European
indifference
curve

/

Governmentprovided
health care

Im Figure A.8 | iaeicw-aem Health care systems

===== PAGE 302 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 3.49 Loss aversion/status quo bias makes it very difficult to take
money or other benefits away from people.

Exercise 3.50 (a) Once a program is enacted, loss aversion will make the
beneficiaries of that program extremely averse to canceling it. This example
also illustrates the concept of status quo bias. (b) The sunset provision is supposed to shorten the lifespan of temporary programs, since simply letting legislation expire is easier than taking positive action to cancel it.

Exercise 3.54 Assume that the emperor computed the number of grains
of rice that he would owe the inventor during the first n days, where n is a
number considerably less than 64, used that number as an anchor, and insufficiently adjusted the number upwards.

Exercise 3.55 Advertise it as being sharply reduced from an original, even
higher price.

Exercise 3.56 The answer is (b) $10. The answer is the value to you of going
to the Dylan concert ($50) minus what you would have to pay to go ($40).
Only 21.6 percent of the professional economists in the study got the answer
tight, which is particularly embarrassing if you reflect on the fact that they
could have done better had they simply picked their answers randomly.

Exercise 3.57 The conclusion overlooks the opportunity costs of making
money. In real life, all things are not equal: if you decide to do something
like work more to increase your income, there is an opportunity cost in terms
of foregone leisure, time with family and friends, and so on. As you work
and earn more and more, the marginal benefit of money will go down, and
you will ultimately hit a point where you are better off switching to leisure.
Working more than that is working too much.

Exercise 3.58 The receptionist might be unfamiliar with the sunk-cost fallacy, which is another reason people who just purchased a one-week pass
come back for more.

Exercise 3.59 The sunk-cost fallacy, again.
Exercise 3.60 See Figure A.9.

Exercise 3.61 (a) If Tim returned the phone, he would go from a(0) = 0 to
v(-1) = —3, meaning that he would experience a loss of 3 units of value. (b) If
Bill were to pick up a phone, he would go from v(0) = 0 to o(+1) = 1, meaning
that he would experience a gain of 1 units of value. Bill’s foregone gain when
he does not pick up a phone, then, is 1. (c}) Because Tim’s loss in value terms
would exceed Bill’s foregone gain, Tim is more likely to end up the owner
(proud or not) of the new iPhone.

Exercise 3.62 (a) When the price went from $7 to $4, in terms of deviations
from his reference point, Larry went from +0 to —3. In terms of value, therefore, he went from v(0) = 0 to o(-3) = —9, meaning that he experienced a
loss of 9 units of value. (b) When the price went from $7 to $4, in terms of

283

===== PAGE 303 =====

284 Appendix: Answer Key

Affordability

Capacity

fm Figure A.9 | gteiew-eem Pear Corporation hijinks

deviations from her reference point, Janet went from +3 to +0. In terms of
value, then, she went from v(+3) = 3/3 = 1 to v(0) = 0, meaning that she
experienced a loss of 1 unit of value. (c) Larry is more disappointed. Note that
the difference is that Larry views the decline in stock price as a loss, whereas
Janet views it as a foregone gain.

Exercise 3.63 Loss aversion makes the gain of what you might become seem
small relative to the loss of what you are — prompting people to forgo the former in order to avoid the latter, even when they acknowledge that it would be
better to act differently.

Exercise 3.64 The aspiration treadmill.

Exercise 3.65 (a) Sunk-cost fallacy. (b) Anchoring and adjustment. (c) Loss
aversion. (d) Sunk-cost fallacy. (e) Failure to consider opportunity costs.
(f) The compromise effect.

Chapter 4

Exercise 4.8 1/52. Whatever card you pick the first time around, you have a
1/52 chance to pick the same card again the second time.

Exercise 4.9 You can apply the rule only when the outcomes in question are
equally likely, and there is no reason to think that is true here.

Exercise 4.10 The outcome space is reduced to {GB, GG} and the probability
is 1/2.

===== PAGE 304 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 4.11 (a) (BBB, GGG, BBG, GGB, BGB, GBG, BGG, GBB}. (b) {GGG,
BBG, GGB, BGB, GBG, BGG, GBB}. (c) 1/7. (d) {GGG, GGB, GBG, BGG}.
({e) 1/4.

Exercise 4.12 (a) (W/W, W/W, R/R, R/R, W/R, R/W}. (b) (W/W, W/W,
W/R}. (c) 1/3.

Exercise 4.13 (a) {W/W, W/W, B/B, B/B, R/R, R/R, R/W, W/R}. (b) {B/B,
B/B}. (c) 1. (d) {R/R, R/R, R/W}. (e) 1/3.

Exercise 4.14 The analysis of this problem is not completely uncontroversial, but it is fairly widely agreed that the probability is 1/3.

Exercise 4.16 (c) and (d).

Exercise 4.17 4/52 = 1/13.

Exercise 4.21 It is equally likely: the probability is 1/36 either way.
Exercise 4.22 (d).

Exercise 4.23 Not independent.

Exercise 4.24 Because there are two (mutually exclusive) ways for the dots
to add up to eleven, the answer is 1/36 + 1/36 = 1/18.

Exercise 4.25 (a) 1/52 * 1/52 = 1/2704. (b) 1/13 * 1/13 = 1/169.

Exercise 4.26 (a) 1/6 *1/6 = 1/36. (b) (1 — 1/6) * (1 — 1/6) = 25/36. (c) 1/6
*(1— 1/6) + (1 — 1/6) * 1/6 = 10/36. (d) 1 — (1 — 1/6) * (1 — 1/6) = 11/36.

Exercise 4.27 It would be a mistake because you would be applying the or
tule to two outcomes that are not mutually exclusive.

Exercise 4.28 The answer is:

6 5 4 3 2 1 1
a a a * *
49 48 47 46 45 44 13,983,816

This amounts to about 0.000,000,07. So, if you were to play once a year, on the
average you would win once every 13,983,816 years. If you played once per
day, given that there are 364.25 days in a year, on the average you would win
once every 268,920 years.

Exercise 4.30 If people assess the value of the ticket by using the amount
that can be won as an anchor and adjusting downwards, insufficient adjustment would imply that they overestimate the value of the ticket. If, in addition, people assess the probability of winning by using the probability of
picking the first number correctly as an anchor and adjusting downwards,
insufficient adjustment would imply that they overestimate the probability
of winning.

285

===== PAGE 305 =====

286

Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 4.31 (a) Pr(H|T) means “The probability that the patient has a
headache given that he or she has a tumor,” whereas Pr(T|H) means “The
probability that the patient has a tumor given that he or she has a headache.”
(b) The probabilities are clearly different. In general, we should expect that
Pr(H|T) > Pr(T|H).

Exercise 4.33 You already know the answer is one in four, since there are
four aces in a deck of cards and the ace of spades is one of them. But you can
compute the answer using Definition 4.31 as follows:

Pr(Aa&A) Pr(Aa) — 1/52

Pr(A@la) = aa) Pr(A) ~ 4/52 “4

Exercise 4.35 Pr(Aa,&Aa,) = Pr(Aa,) * Pr(Aa,|Aa,) = 1/52 *0 = 0.

Exercise 4.38 (a) Assume that Pr(A|B) = Pr(A), then use Proposition 4.34 to
derive Pr(B| A) = Pr(B). (b) Assume that Pr(B|A) = Pr(B), then use Proposition
4.32 to derive Pr(A&B) = Pr(A) * Pr(B). (c) Assume that Pr(A&B) = Pr(A) *
Pr(B), then use Proposition 4.34 to derive Pr(A|B) = Pr(A).

Exercise 4.40 (a) See Figure A.10. (b) The probability that your patient dies
within the year is

Pr(D) = Pr(D|A)* Pr(A) + Pr(D|B)* Pr(B) = 4/5 #1/3 + 1/5*2/3 =2/5.

Exercise 4.41 The probability is

Pr(P) = Pr(P|E) *Pr(E) + Pr(P| sE) * Pr(+E) = .90* 60 + 50+ 40 = 544.20 = .74

Exercise 4.43 The answer is

Pr(D|A)* Pr(A) 4/5*1/3
Pr(D|A)* Pr(A) + Pr(D|B)* Pr(B) 4/5*1/3+ 1/5*2/3

Pr(A|D) 2/3.

Pr(DIA)

Pr(-DJA)

Pr(D|B)

Pr(aD|B) ~ 72

fm Figure A.10| ateicw-mie Cancers A and B

===== PAGE 306 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 4.44 The probability that your test was easy given that you passed
is
Pr(P|E) * Pr(E) 5A

PrE|P) ==] E)*Pr(E) +Pr(P|aE)*Pr(aE) 74 7

Your friend is probably right.

Exercise 4.45 (a) 1/4 * 1/6 = 1/24. (b) 3/4 * 2/3 = 6/12 = 12/24. (c) 1/24
+ 12/24 = 13/24. (d) (1/24)/(13/24) = 1/13. Good news!

Exercise 4.46 (a) The probability assigned to the hypothesis goes from 1/2
to 2/3 after the first trial. (b) It goes from 2/3 to 4/5 after the second trial.

Exercise 4.47 Given the way we have defined H and E for the purposes of

this exercise, Pr(E|H) is now zero, since a coin with two heads cannot come

up tails. Therefore, the posterior probability will equal 0 no matter the prior:
O* Pr(H)

Pr(HIE) O* Pr(H) + 0.5* Pr(nH) °

Exercise 4.48 The outcomes are dependent, but not mutually exclusive.

Exercise 4.49 The answer is (1/25,000)) = 1/15,625,000,000,000. So if
Langford gambles on undoctored machines three times a year, he could expect
to win once every 15,625,000,000,000 years. Notice, though, that the probability that the machines were doctored given that he won does not necessarily
equal the probability that he would win given that the machines were not
doctored.

Exercise 4.50 The supposed reason is that economists (who tend to be highly
numerate) tend not to gamble, which is a big problem in a hospitality industry
heavily dependent on gambling revenue.

Exercise 4.51 (a) (4) ~ 0.000,001. (b) (2)" ~ 0.0008. (c) (4) ~ 0.01. Al-male
editorial boards of that size are unlikely to result from a purely random
process.

Exercise 4.52 (a) 0.250? ~ 0.016. (b) (1—0.250)° ~ 0.42. (ce) 3 0.250 * (1—0.250)?
~ 0.42. (d) 1 —(1 — 0.250) 0.58.

Exercise 4.53 (a) Because there are 26 letters in the alphabet, the probability is (1/26)® = 1/208,827,064,576 ~ 0.000,000,000,005. (b) The probability
that any one letter will not spell out the vulgarity is 1 — 1/208,827,064,576 =
208 827,064,575 /208,827,064,576. So the probability that at least one of the letters will spell out the vulgarity is 1 — (208,827,064,575 /208,827,064,576)1° ~
0.000,000,000,5. That is a little higher, but not much.

Exercise 4.54 Note that there are 2” = 1024 different ways to answer ten
true/false questions. So: (a) 1/1024. (b) 1/1024. (c) 1/1024. (d) 10/1024.
(e) 11/1024.

287

===== PAGE 307 =====

288 Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise4.55 (a)1/2.(b)1/2.(c)(1/2)"=1/1,024.(d)1—(1/1,024) = 1023/1024.

Chapter 5

Exercise 5.1 If you do put all of your eggs in one basket, the events “Egg 1
breaks,” “Egg 2 breaks,” etc., would not be independent — which is bad if you
want to make sure that some eggs remain whole.

Exercise 5.2 (a) You want them to be independent. (b) They would be
dependent.

Exercise 5.3. The sellers want you to think you are more likely to win if you
buy a ticket in this particular location. Thus, they hope (and perhaps expect)
that you will take the outcomes “A previous ticket sold here was a winner”
and “A future ticket sold here will be a winner” not to be independent, when
in fact they are.

Exercise 5.4 People assume that triples of bad things — such as the three
deaths — are dependent, when in fact they are not.

Exercise 5.5 (a) 1/256. (b) 1/2.

Exercise 5.6 The outcome 43-6-2-1 will seem more representative, and
therefore more likely.

Exercise 5.7 (a) 1/10,000. (b) 1/100.
Exercise 5.8 1/25,000.

Exercise 5.13 The answers to all these questions are given by the expression
1 — (7/10), where t is the number of hours. So: (a) 0.51. (b) Approximately 0.66.
(c) Approximately 0.97. Notice that under these circumstances, it is highly
likely that you will come across at least one tornado during a 10-hour hike.

Exercise 5.14 The probability of a flood in any given year is 1/10. So: (a)
0.81. (b) 0.18. (c) 0.19. (d) Approximately 0.65.

Exercise 5.15 The probability of having no attack on any given day is 1 —
0.000,1 = 0.999,9. There are 365.25 * 10 = 3652.5 days in ten years. So the probability of at least one attack in ten years is 1 — (0.999,9)°*5 = 0.306 = 30.6
percent.

Exercise 5.16 (a) Approximately 0.08. (b) Approximately 0.15. (c) Approximately 0.55. (d) Approximately 0.98.

Exercise 5.17 Imagine that you line up the 30 students in a row. The first student can be born on any day of the year, and the probability of this happening is
365/365; the probability that the second student does not share a birthday with
the first is 364/365; the probability that the third student does not share a birthday with either of the first two is 363/365; and so on, until you get to the 30th
student: the probability that this student will not share a birthday with any of the

===== PAGE 308 =====

Appendix: Answer Key 289

other 29 students is 336/365. So the probability you are looking for is 365/365 *
364/365 * ... 336/365 ~ 29.4 percent. Thus, ina class this size, the probability that
at least two students share a birthday is quite high: about 70.6 percent.

Exercise 5.18 (a) Approximately 0.634. (b) Approximately 0.999,96.

Exercise 5.19 (a) The probability of a catastrophic engine failure is p.
(b) The probability of a catastrophic engine failure is 1 — (1 — p)? = 2p — p’.
To see why this is so, refer to Figure A.11. (c) The single-engine plane. Notice
that when p is small, p? will be so small as to be negligible. If so, the twinengine plan is virtually twice as likely to experience a catastrophic engine
failure as the single-engine plane! (d) Now, the probability of a catastrophic
engine failure is p’.

| Non-Failure Failure

Non-Failure

Failure

m Figure A.11| The private jets

Exercise 5.21 Because the base rate in men is extremely low, the test would
not be diagnostic.

Exercise 5.22 Let B mean “The cab is blue,” and let P mean “The witness
says that the cab is blue.” Here is the equation that produces the right answer:
8/10 * 15/100
= A1%
PrBIP)= Frgniei00+ 210"e00 ~ “1”
Notice that, in spite of the fact that the witness is relatively reliable, the cab
that was involved in the accident is more likely to be green than blue

Exercise 5.23 The answer is given by this equation:

75/100 * 20/100

=~ 43%
75/100 * 20/10 + 25/100 * 80/100

Exercise 5.24 The answer is given by this equation:

1/1000 * 90/100
1/1000 * 90/100 + 10/1000 * 10/100

= 47%

Exercise 5.25 The probability is:

10 « 999
10,000,000 1000
10 « 999 9,999,990 * 1

10,000,000 1000 ~ 10,000,000 1000

= 0.001 = 0.1%

===== PAGE 309 =====

290 Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 5.26 (a) 98/1,000,000,000. (b) 19,999,998/1,000,000,000.
(c) 98/20,000,096 ~ 0.000005 = 0.0005 percent. (d) No.

Exercise 5.27 In Kabul the base rate is likely to be higher, and this might
make the test diagnostic.

Exercise 5.28 The correct answer is C.

Exercise 5.30 If, for whatever reason, you manage to acquire a reputation
for being smart, honest, diligent, and cool, you can ride that wave for a long
time: confirmation bias means that people will continue to think of you in that
way even if you do not always act the part. If, by contrast, people start thinking of you as stupid, dishonest, lazy, or uncool, the reputation will be very
difficult to get rid of: confirmation bias means that whatever you do is liable
to be interpreted as supporting that view.

Exercise 5.32 Books with titles of that kind will largely be read by people
who already believe that the liberal mob/the Christian right are destroying
America. Then, confirmation bias will set in and further support the readers’
preexisting convictions.

Exercise 5.34

Pr(TIH Pr(H|T) * Pr(T)
(a) Pr) = Sa Prt) + Pro} *Pr(oT)
99/100 * 1/10,000 ~ 0.001
99/100 *1/10,000 + 110+ 9999/10,000
Pr(GIF)*Pr(F
(b) Pr(Fic) (GIF) * Pr(F)

Pr(G|F) * Pr(F) + Pr(G|4F) * Pr(=F)

95/100 * 999/1000
95/100 * 999/1000 + 5/100 * 1/1000

= 0.99996.

Exercise 5.35 Given that the optometrist mainly sees contact users without
problems, an image of a healthy user is most available to her. Given that the
ophthalmologist mainly sees users with problems, an image of an unhealthy
user is most available to him. Insofar as the two are prone to the availability
bias, the optometrist is likely to underestimate, and the ophthalmologist to
overestimate, the probability of developing serious problems as a results of
wearing contacts.

Exercise 5.37 If people are more likely to remember cases when meteorologists’ predictions were off, which is likely, the availability heuristic will cause
people to think meteorologists are more poorly calibrated than they really are.

Exercise 5.39 Hindsight bias.

Exercise 5.40 The Dunning—Kruger effect.

===== PAGE 310 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 5.41 The heuristics-and-biases program says heuristics are largely
functional and only sometimes lead to bias, which is a far cry from saying that
people are irredeemably stupid or hopelessly lost.

Exercise 5.42 Pr(HHH) = (2/3) = 8/27 whereas Pr(HHT) = (2/3)°(1/3) =
4/27. It is best to bet on HHH.

Exercise 5.43 Since we are talking about overestimating the probability of a
conjunction — the fact that the first member is male anp the second member
is male AND so on - the person may have committed the conjunction fallacy.

Exercise 5.44 (a) 0.04. (b) 0.64. (c) 0.36. (d) Approximately 0.67.

Exercise 5.45 (a) 0.072. (b) 0.092. (c) 0.164. (d) Approximately 0.439. (e) The
base-rate fallacy.

Exercise 5.46 This problem is in effect the same as Exercise 5.22, so the
answer is the same: approximately 41 percent.

Exercise 5.47 (a) Let T mean that a person is a terrorist and M mean that
a person is Muslim. Based on the figures provided, I assume that Pr(T) =
10/300,000,000; that Pr(M|T) = 9/10; and that Pr(M|-T) = 2/300. If so:

10
300,000,000 10

10 9, 299,999,990 2

300,000,000 “10 * 300,000,000 ~ 300

Pr(T|M) = 0.000,005 = 0.0005%

(b) Obviously, there are many more dangerous things for Juan Williams to
worry about. But if the image of a Muslim terrorist is particularly available to
him, he would be prone to exaggerating the probability that a random Muslim.
would fall in that category.

Exercise 5.48 ...confirmation bias.
Exercise 5.49 Representativeness.
Exercise 5.50 The affect heuristic.

Exercise 5.51 (a) Confirmation bias would make Schumpeter more likely
to remember and give weight to cases that support his hypothesis than cases
that do not. (b) Assuming episodes where Schumpeter performed well in the
three domains are particularly salient to him, availability bias would cause
him to exaggerate the likelihood of a good performance. (c) An overconfident
Schumpeter would be wrong more often than he thinks when it comes to his
abilities in various domains. (d) The conjunction fallacy would cause him to
overestimate the probability of the conjunction cI am the greatest economist
in the world” anp “I am the best horseman in all of Austria” AND "I am the
greatest lover in all of Vienna.”

291

===== PAGE 311 =====

292 Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 5.52 (a) Confirmation bias. (b) Disjunction fallacy. (c) Availability
bias. (d) Base-rate neglect. (e) Availability bias. (f) Conjunction fallacy.
(g) Hindsight bias. (h) Availability bias.

Chapter 6

Exercise 6.1 (a) A maximin reasoner would purchase the warranty. (b) A
maximax reasoner would not.

Exercise 6.2 (a) C. (b) A. (c) B. The risk-payoff matrix is Table A.2.
Table A.2_ Risk-payoff matrix

S, S,
A 2 0
B 1 1
c 0 4

Exercise 6.5 See Figure A.12.

1/13,983,816 $1,000,000

13,983,815/ ~~ $0
19,983,816

jm Figure A.12| Lotto 6/49 Tree

Exercise 6.8 (a) EV(A) =1/2*10+1/2*0 =5. (b) EV(R) =4.
Exercise 6.10 See Table A.3.
Exercise 6.11 (a) The expected value is 1/5 * (—$30) = —$6. (b) Yes.
Exercise 6.13 $3.50.

Table A.3 Roulette payoffs

Bet Description Payout Pr(win) Expected Value
Straight Up One number $36 1/38 $36/38
Split Two numbers $18 2/38 $36 /38
Street Three numbers $12 3/38 $36/38
Corner Four numbers $9 4/38 $36 /38
First Five 0, 00, 1, 2,3 $7 5/38 $35/38

Sidine Six numbers $6 6/38 $36/38

===== PAGE 312 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

First 12 1-12 $3 2/38 $36/38
Second 12 13-24 $3 2/38 $36/38
Third 12 25-36 $3 2/38 $36/38
Red $2 8/38 $36/38
Black $2 8/38 $36/38
Even $2 8/38 $36/38
Odd $2 8/38 $36/38
Low 1-18 $2 8/38 $36/38
High 19-36 $2 8/38 $36/38

Exercise 6.14 (a) $400,020. (b) Open the boxes. (c) $150,030. (d) Take the sure
amount.

Exercise 6.16 (a) —5/—100 = 1/20. (b) -5/-10 = 1/2.
Exercise 6.18 The answer is 1/1,000,000.
Exercise 6.19 p = —79/—325 ~ 0.24

Exercise 6.23 (a) EU(R) = u(4) = 4? = 16. (b) EU(A) = 1/2 * u(10) + 1/2 *
u(Q) = 1/2 * 10? + 1/2 * 0? = 50. (c) You should accept the gamble.

Exercise 6.24 (a) About 0.000,07. (b) 1. (c) The dollar.

Exercise 6.25 (a) EU(A) =1/3* V9 = 1. EU(B) =1/4* V16 =1EU(C) =1/5
* V/25 = 1. Choose either one. (b) EU(A) = 1/3 * 9? = 27. EU(B) = 1/4 #16 = 64.
EU(C) = 1/5 * 25° = 125. Choose C.

Exercise 6.26 (a) (i) EV(G) = 1/425 + 3/4*1 =7. (ii) EU(G) =1/4* V25 +
3/4* V1 =2. (b) (i) EV(G’) = 2/3 *7 + 1/3 * 4 = 6. (ii) EU(G*) =2/3 * V7 +
1/3* V4 = 2.43.

Exercise 6.27 (a) See Figure A.13(a). (b) See Figure A.13(b). (c) EU(-S) = 0.
(d) EU(S) = 0.85 * 10 + 0.10 * (—2) + 0.05 * (—10) = 7.8. (e) Have the operation.

Exercise6.28 (a) See Figure A.14. (b) The expected utility of going homeis3/4
#12+1/4*(—2) = 8.5. The expected utility of staying put is 2/3 *9 + 1/3 *3
= 7. Thus, you should go home, in spite of the possibility that your aunt might
show up.

Exercise 6.29 There are many ways to complete this exercise, but the important result is that B is the rational choice no matter what.

Exercise 6.31 (a) p = 1/2. (b) p = 3/4. (c) p = 2/3.

Exercise 6.33 In this case, EU(A) = 1/2 * 3° + 1/2 * 1? = 5, whereas EU(R)
= = 4. So you should definitely accept the gamble.

Exercise 6.34 (a) Risk prone. (b) Risk averse. (c) Risk prone. (d) Risk averse.
(e) Risk prone. (f) Risk neutral. (g) Risk prone.

293

===== PAGE 313 =====

294 Appendix: Answer Key

Improvement
0.85 (+10)
Surgery No change
(-2)
Deterioration
0.05 (10)
No change
No surgery ~ (gy
(a)
Improvement No change Deterioration
s 10 -2 -10
aS ie) 0 ie)

(b)

a Figure A.13| Hearing loss

Spending Thanksgiving
with family when aunt
is not there (12)

Spending Thanksgiving
with family when aunt
is there (-2)

Spending Thanksgiving
in dorm with roommate

(9)

Spending Thanksgiving
in dorm without
roommate (3)

ms Figure A.14| lgtcliccwemcy Thanksgiving indecision

Exercise 6.36 See Figure A.15.
Exercise 6.38 V5.

Exercise 6.39 (a) The utility of $4 is 2. The expected utility of G is 3/2. The
certainty equivalent is 9/4. Choose $4. (b) The utility of $4 is 16. The expected
utility of G is 21. The certainty equivalent is V21. Choose G.

===== PAGE 314 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

u(x)
u({B)

EUG)

o A EV(G) CE(G) 8 x

| Figure A.15| Finding the certainty equivalent, cont.

Exercise 6.40 (a) The expected value of the gamble is 1.75. (b) The expected
utility is 5/4. (c) The certainty equivalent is 25/16. (d) p = 1/2.

Exercise 6.41 (a) The expected utility is 5/2. (b) The certainty equivalent is
25/4. (c) The probability is 1/8. (d) You are risk averse.

Exercise 6.42 Approximately 0.000,000,49 cents.
Exercise 6.44 (a) The boxes. (b) The fixed amount. (c) $118,976.
Exercise 6.45 (a) EU(B) = 3. (b) EU(R) = 4. (c) Press the red button.

Exercise 6.46 Nowhere does the theory say that people perform these calculations in their heads — for the obvious reason that doing so would be impossible or prohibitively slow.

Chapter 7

Exercise 7.4 The value of +0 is still v(+0) = 0, but the value of —10 is v(—10)
2V|- 10] 2V10 ~ —6.32. Thus, the absolute difference is |v(—10) —
v(+0)| |-6.32 — 0| = 6.32. The value of —1000 is v(—1000) 2 1000]
= —2V1000 ~ —63.25; the value of —1010 is v(—1010) 2 1010]
—2V1010 ~ —63.56. Hence, the absolute difference is |v(—1010) — v(—1000)| ~
|-63.56 — (—63.25)| = 0.31. The absolute difference between v(+0) and v(—10)
is much greater than the absolute difference between v(—1000) and v(—1010).

Exercise 7.5 The difference between v(+10) and v(+15) is v(+15)—v(+10)
= V15/2— V10/2 ~ 0.50. The difference between v(+120) and v(+125)
is v(+125) — 0(+120) = V125/2 — V120/2 ~ 0.16. The difference between.
v(+10) and 0(+15) is much greater than than the difference between 0(+120)
and v(+125). Thus, an S-shaped. value function can in fact account for the
observed behavior.

295

===== PAGE 315 =====

296 Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 7.6 This problem can be analyzed using Figure 7.3 on page 156.
P ry: ig Fg pag!

Jen is risk averse because she takes “no animals saved” to be her reference

point. Joe is risk prone because he takes “no animals lost” to be his reference

point.

Exercise 7.8 (a) Omitted. (b) v(A) = 1/2 * V1000/2 ~ 11.18 (©) v(B) = V500/2
= 15.81.(d)0(C) = 1/2*(—-2)V1000 = — 31.62.(e)0(D) = — 2/500 = — 44.72.

Exercise 7.9 (a) The value of the gain is v(+4) = V-+4/2 = V2 ~ 141 and
the value of the loss is v(—4) 2v|-4 2*2 4. In absolute terms,
the loss is greater than the gain. (b) Relative to a $0 reference point, $0 is
coded as +0, $2 as +2, and $4 as +4. The value of the sure thing is v(+2) =
V+2/2=1. The value of the gamble is 1/2 * (+0) + 1/2 * o(44) = V+0/2
+1/2* V +4/2 ~ 0.71. The person prefers the sure amount. (c) Relative to a
$4 reference point, $0 is coded as —4, $2 as -2, and $4 as +0. The value of the
sure thing is v(—2) 2vV|-2 2V2 ~ —2.83. The value of the gamble
is 1/2*v(—4) + 1/2*0(+0) = 1/2*(—2)V[—4] + 1/2*(-2)VJ £0 2. The

person prefers the gamble.

Exercise 7.10 (a) Relative to a $1 reference point, $1 is coded as +0, $2 as
+1, and $5 as +4. The value of the sure thing is o(+1) = V1/2 ~ 0.71 and
the value of the gamble 1/2*v( + 0)+1/2*0(+4) =1/2* V+0/2+1/2 *
V+4/2 = 1/2» \/2 = 0.71. The person is indifferent. (b) Relative to a $5 reference point, $1 is coded as —4, $2 as -3, and $5 as +0. The value of the sure
thing is v(—3) 2v/-3 2V3 ~ —3.46. The value of the gamble is
1/2*v(—4) + 1/2*0( £0) = 1/2 * (—2) VI—4] + 1/2*(-2) V1 =O = 1/2*# V4
= —2. The person prefers the gamble.

Exercise 7.11 The analysis in this section says that people are more risk
prone when they are in the realm of losses. Assuming people who are made
to feel poor end up feeling like they are in the realm of losses, the analysis
suggests that they should be more likely to choose lottery tickets - which is
exactly what the researchers found.

Exercise 7.12 (a) v( + 48 + 27) = o(+ 75) = V75/3 =5. (b) v(+ 48) + o(+ 27)
=V48/3+ V27/3=7. (c) It is better to segregate.

Exercise 7.14 (a) Chances are you would make fewer purchases. (b) The
arrangement would encourage you to segregate your losses but integrate your
gains, which would simultaneously increase the pain of paying for your stuff
and reduce the enjoyment you would derive from it.

Exercise 7.15 The procedure encourages travelers to segregate the costs,
which is likely to make them feel worse about the expenditure than they
would if they were integrated.

Exercise 7.16 (a) v(—144-25) = v(-169)=-3V/169=—39. (b) v(—144) +
v(—25) 3V144 + (—3)V25 = —51. (c) It is better to integrate.

===== PAGE 316 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 7.17 The advertisement is supposed to make you buy more books
by encouraging you to integrate the costs. Because the books are different, you
are less likely to integrate them.

Exercise 7.18 (a) You should encourage voters to integrate: “You're still taking home $900k!” (b) You should encourage voters to segregate: “You made
$1M! That money is yours! The government is taking $100k of your money!”

Exercise 7.19 (a) v(-9 + 2) = v(—7)= — 5.29. (b) o(—9) + v(+2) = —5. (c} It
is better to segregate.

Exercise 7.21 (a) You must ignore the column marked B. (b) You must ignore
the columns marked P and R.

Exercise 7.22 The choice pattern (1a) and (2a) is excluded, as is the choice
pattern (1b) and (2b).

Exercise 7.24 A strict preference for A over B entails that EU(A) > EU(B),
which means that 1 * u(30) > 0.80 * 4(45). Divide each side by four, and you get
0.25 * u(30) > 0.20 * u(45). A strict preference for D over C entails that EU(D)
> EU(C), which means that 0.20 * u(45) > 0.25 * u(30). But this is inconsistent.

Exercise 7.26 Being ambiguity averse, you would rather bet on the fair coin.

Exercise 7.27 Since the probabilities are most ambiguous in game 3, you
would be least likely to bet on that game.

Exercise 7.28 (a) Donner is ambiguity prone. (b) Assuming he considers
himself competent at real-estate investing, his attitudes are compatible with
the competence hypothesis.

Exercise 7.33 The value of a dollar for sure is (1) v(1) = v(1), given that
(1) = 1. The value of the lottery is 7(1/1000) v(1000). If o(-) is S-shaped,
v(1000) < 1000 * v(1). But given that a (x) > x for low probabilities, 7(1/1000)
> 1/1000. If (1/1000) is sufficiently greater than 1/1000, the value of the lottery will exceed the value of the dollar.

Exercise 7.34 (a) 1000. (b) 1018. (c) 1030. (d) Invest in stocks. (e) Invest in
bonds.

Exercise 7.35 The value of the status quo is v(0) = 0. The value of the gamble
is 0(G) = 1/2 * V10/2+ 1/2 * (-2) V|-10] = 1/2 V5 — V10 = —2.04. You

would reject the gamble in favor of the status quo.

Exercise 7.36 (a) By segregating expenditures, you will feel the loss of
money more intensely, which can lead to reduced spending. (b) The term is
mental accounting. (c) One problem is that you might overspend in one category and underspend in another, violating fungibility.

Exercise 7.37 (a) Silver lining. (b) Mental accounting. (c) Competence
hypothesis. (d) Certainty effect. (e) Ambiguity aversion.

297

===== PAGE 317 =====

298 Appendix: Answer Key

Chapter 8
Exercise 8.3 See Table A.4.

Table A.4 Cost of credit

Credit-card offer $1,000 $100 $10,000

Silver Axxess Visa Card $247.20 $67.92 $2,040.00
Finance Gold MasterCard $387.50 $263.75 $1,625.00
Continental Platinum MasterCard $248.20 $68.92 $2,041.00
Gold Image Visa Card $213.50 $53.75 $1,811.00
Archer Gold American Express $296.50 $118.75 $2,074.00
Total Tribute American Express $332.50 $168.25 $1,975.00
Splendid Credit Eurocard $294.50 $94.25 $2,297.00

Exercise 8.5 + = 0.20 = 20 percent.

Exercise 8.8 (a) $105. (b) $162.89. (c) $1146.74.

Exercise 8.9 (a) $8664.62. (b) 8603.62. (c) 14,104 percent. (d) Just don’t do it.
Exercise 8.12 (a) 1.00, 0.30, 0.04, and 1.34. (b) Choose d. (c} Choose a.
Exercise 8.13 The grasshopper’s delta is lower than the ant’s.

Exercise 8.14 (a) Low. (b) High. (c) High. (d) Low. (e). High.

Exercise 8.15 (a) The impartial spectator’s delta is one. (b) Ours is much
lower.

Exercise 8.17 To figure out when you would be indifferent, set up this equation —1 = 0 * (—9) and solve for 8 =1/9. You would (weakly) prefer one stitch
just in case @ = 1/9.

Exercise 8.18 (a) The curve would be steeper. (b) The curve would be flatter.

Exercise 8.19 (a) 6 = 1/3. (b) 6 = 3/4. (c) 6 = 1/2. (d) 6 = 3/4.
Exercise 8.20 (a) 2/3. (b) 1. (¢) 1/2.

Exercise 8.21 (a) a =1. (b) a =0. (2) 8 =0.5.

Exercise 8.23 The table would look like Table A.5, and 5 = 80/609.

Exercise 8.24 Young people discount the future too much — that is, their
delta is too low — to put much weight on what happens 30-40 years hence.

Exercise 8.25 (a) People with higher discount factors tend to have higher
credit scores. (b) People with higher discount factors are more likely to save
for the future and better at managing debt, which means that they are more
creditworthy.

===== PAGE 318 =====

Appendix: Answer Key

Exercise 8.26 (a) 5 = 1/(1 + 3), meaning that r = i. (b) 8 =1/ V1 + 9).

Table AS Time discounting

£=0 f=1
a 81 16
1 625

Chapter 9

Exercise 9.2 (a)1+1/3*1*3+1/3*12*9=5. (b)1+1*2/3%3 +1 (2/3)
*9=7.(c)1+1/3 *2/3*3 + 1/3 * (2/32 #9 = 3,

Exercise 9.4 (a) U™(a) = 8 and U™(b) = 10; on Thursday, you would choose
b. U"*(a) = 6.67 and U"*(b) = 8.33; on Wednesday, you would choose b.

(b) U™{a) = 8 and U™"(b) = 2; on Thursday, you would choose a. U"{a) =
1.33 and U"“(b) = 0.33; on Wednesday, you would choose a.

(c) U™{a) = 8 and U™(b) = 6; on Thursday, you would choose a. U"(a) = 4
and U”(b) = 6; on Wednesday, you would choose b.

(d) U™{a) = 8 and U™"(b) = 4; on Thursday, you would choose a. U"{a) =
2.67 and U"(b) = 2.67; on Wednesday, you would be indifferent between a
and b.

Exercise 9.5 (a) 8 and 4. (b) 12 and 6. (c) 3 and 1. (d) 3 and 6. (e) Benny. (f)
Benny.

Exercise 9.6 (a) 2/3. (b) 3/4.
Exercise 9.7 (a) 6 = 3/4 and 6 = 2/3. (b) x = 4.5.
Exercise 9.8 6 = 4/5 and 6 = 1/2.

Exercise 9.9 Wicksteed is indifferent at 8 = 1/8. If he does not reach for the
blanket, B can be no greater than that, so B = 1/8.

Exercise 9.11 (a) If you are an exponential discounter, from the point of view
of t = 0, you choose between U(a) = 3, U°(b) = 5, U(c) = 8, and U(d) = 13.
Obviously you prefer d, and because you are time consistent, that is the movie
you will watch.

(b) If you are a naive hyperbolic discounter, from the point of view of
t = 0, you choose between U°(a) = 3, U(b) = 1/2 #5 =2.5, Uc) =1/2 *8 =4,
and U(d) = 1/2 *13 =6.5. Thus, you will skip the mediocre movie and plan
to see the fantastic one. From the point of view of t = 1, you choose between
U'(b) = 5, Uc) = 1/2 #8 =4, and U(d) = 1/2 #13 =6.5. You will skip the good
movie, still planning to see the fantastic one. From the point of view of t = 2, you
choose between U?{c) = 8, and U*(d) = 1/2 * 13 = 6.5. You watch the great movie,
foregoing the opportunity to see the fantastic one.

(c) If you are a sophisticated hyperbolic discounter, you know that you would
be unable to skip the great movie at t = 2 and that you consequently will not

299

===== PAGE 319 =====

300 Appendix: Answer Key

get to watch the fantastic movie. You also know that from the point of view of
t = 1, your only realistic options would be U'(b) = 5 and U(c) = 1/2 *8 =4.
Consequently, you would watch the good movie. From the point of view of
t = 0, then, your only realistic options are U°(a) = 3 and U%\(b) = 1/2 *5 =2.5,
meaning that you will watch the mediocre movie.

Exercise 9.12 (a) 8. (b) 13. (c) 4. (d) 12.33.
Exercise 9.14 Less pleasant.

Exercise 9.15 Given that the episode represented by a solid line has higher
peak utility than the episode represented by a dashed line, and that the two
have the same end utility, the person would favor the former over the latter.

Exercise 9.16 Assuming the college years contain great peak experiences
and end on a high note, e.g., with a wonderful graduation ceremony, the
peak-—end rule will make people remember those years with great fondness.
This is true even if there are long periods of tedium or worse.

Exercise 9.18 Projection bias.

Exercise 9.19 (a) People overestimate the degree of variety they will want
when eating the food, and consequently diversify too much. (b) People tend
to be hungry when selecting their foods, and project their current hunger onto
their future self, although the future selves will get progressively less hungry
as they eat. (c) People in a hot, hungry state cannot fully empathize with their
future, less hot and hungry state.

Exercise 9.20 Gilbert could question the validity of the numbers. But
assuming they are correct, he would say (1) principal, then (2) executive chef,
and then (3) loan officer. Unless you are yourself Gilbert, you know more
about you than Gilbert does. But he thinks you are so bad at “simulating”
future experiences that your knowledge does not translate into any kind of
advantage.

Exercise 9.21 (a) 16/3 and 4. (b) 8 and 6. (c) 4 and 2. (d) 4 and 6. (e) Yves. (f)
Ximena.

Exercise 9.22 (a) Refrain in youth and in middle age, but hit in old age. (b)
Refrain in youth but hit in middle and old age. (c) Hit throughout.

Exercise 9.23 Several answers might be correct, but underprediction of
adaptation certainly is one: we think being a prisoner, etc., is much worse
than it is because we fail to anticipate the extent to which prisoners adapt to
their conditions.

Exercise 9.24 (a) Hyperbolic discounting. (b) Choosing not to choose. (c) Preference over profiles. (d) Hyperbolic discounting. (e) Hyperbolic discounting.
(f) Preference over profiles. (g) Choosing not to choose. (h) Misprediction or
miswanting.

===== PAGE 320 =====

Appendix: Answer Key 301

Chapter 10
Exercise 10.5 (a) (U, L) and (D, R). (b) (U, L). (¢) (U, R).

Exercise 10.10 Suppose that Player I plays U with probability p and Player
II plays L with probability q. (a) There is an equilibrium in which p = q = 1/3.
(b) There is an equilibrium in which p = 1/2 and q = 1.

Exercise 10.11 Suppose that Player I plays U with probability p and Player I
plays L with probability q. (a) There are two equilibria in pure strategies, (U, L)
and {D, R), and a mixed equilibrium in which p = 4/5 and q = 1/5. (b) There
are no equilibria in pure strategies but a mixed equilibrium in which p = q =
1/2. (c) There are two equilibria in pure strategies, (U, L) and (D, R), but no
equilibria in mixed strategies.

Exercise 10.13 (a) The payoff matrix is given in Table A.6. (b) In the unique
Nash equilibrium, both players randomize with probability 1/3, 1/3, and 1/3
(cf. Example 11.6 on pages 250-251).

Table A.6 Rock-paper-scissor payoff matrix

R P s
R 0,0 0,1 1,0
P 1,0 0,0 0,1
s 0,1 1,0 0,0

Exercise 10.16 This game has two Nash equilibria in pure strategies, (S, =S)
and (7S, S), and a mixed equilibrium in which each player plays $ with probability 1/3.

Exercise 10.17 This game has two Nash equilibria in pure strategies, (D, D)
and (H, H), and a mixed equilibrium in which each player plays D with probability 1/3.

Exercise 10.20 Yes.

Exercise 10.21 (a) This game has three Nash equilibria in pure strategies:
(U, L), (M, M), and {D, R). (b) (U, L) and (M, M), but not (D, R), are tremblinghand perfect.

Exercise 10.25 The unique subgame-perfect equilibrium is (D, RL). That is,
Player II plays R at the left node and L and the right node, and (anticipating
this) Player I plays D.

Exercise 10.26 (a) In the unique subgame-perfect equilibrium, players
always Take. (b) No.

Exercise 10.27 You would predict that economics majors would defect more
frequently than non-majors, and that the economics majors therefore would
do worse when playing against each other than non-majors would. Empirical
evidence supports the prediction.

===== PAGE 321 =====

302 Appendix: Answer Key

Chapter 11

Exercise 11.3 In a subgame-perfect equilibrium, a utilitarian Player II will
accept any offer, since to her any division is better than ($0,$0). Because a utilitarian Player I would actually prefer ($5,$5) to any other outcome, that is the
division that he will propose.

Exercise 11.4 See Table A.7 for the actual games played by (a) egoists,
(b) utilitarians, (c) enviers, and (d) Rawlsians. The answers are: (a) (D, D),
(b) {C, C) and {D, D), (¢) (D, D), and (d) (C, C) and (D, D).

Table A.7 Social preferences

Cc D Cc D

Cc 4A 0,5 Cc 8,8 55
D 5,0 3,3 D 55 6,6
(a) Egoists (b) Utilitarians
cD eT
c 00 -55 c 44 0,0
D 5,-5 0,0 D 0,0 3,3
(c) Enviers (d) Rawlsians

Exercise 11.7 Rawlsian preferences.

Chapter 12
Exercise 12.1 (a) ban; (b) nudge; (c) ban; (d) nudge; (e) incentive; (f) ban.

Exercise 12.2 The intervention simply changes the default option from
French fries to apple slices.

Exercise 12.3 The “Bloomberg ban” is not a nudge because it interferes with
the freedom of choice of rational and informed customers who want to buy
large sodas.

===== PAGE 322 =====

Bibliography

Adams, Susan (2015), “The happiest and unhappiest jobs in 2015,” Forbes, February 26,

Ainslie, George (1975), “Specious reward: A behavioral theory of impulsiveness and
impulse control,” Psychological Bulletin, 82 (4), 463-96.

Allais, Maurice (1953), “Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant le risque:
Critique des postulats et axiomes de l’école américaine,” Econometrica, 21 (4), 503-506.

Allingham, Michael (2002), Choice Theory: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Anand, Easha (2008), “Payday lenders back measures to unwind state restrictions,”
Wall Street Journal, October 28, p. A6.

Angner, Erik (2006), “Economists as experts: Overconfidence in theory and practice,”
Journal of Economic Methodology, 13 (1), 1-24.

(2007), Hayek and Natural Law, London: Routledge.

(2015), “Well-being and economics,” in Guy Fletcher, ed., The Routledge Handbook
of the Philosophy of Well-Being, London: Routledge, pp. 492-503.

(no date), “To navigate safely in the vast sea of empirical facts’: Ontology and
methodology in behavioral economics,” Synthese.

and George Loewenstein (2012), “Behavioral economics,” in Uskali Maki, ed.,
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science: Philosophy of Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier,

. 641-90.

Arlely, Dan (2008), Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces that Shape our Decisions, New
York, NY: Harper.

and George Loewenstein (2006), “The heat of the moment: The effect of sexual
arousal on sexual decision making,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19 (2),
87-98.

, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec (2003), “’Coherent arbitrariness’: Stable
demand curves without stable preferences,” The Quarterly Journal of Econontics, 118
(1), 73-105.

and Klaus Wertenbroch (2002), “Procrastination, deadlines, and performance:
Self-control by precommitment,” Psychological Science, 13 (3), 219-24.

Aristotle (1999 [c 350 BCE]), Nicomachean Ethics, Terence Irwin, trans., Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett Publishing Co.

Arkes, Hal R. and Catherine Blumer (1985), “The psychology of sunk cost,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 35 (1), 124-40.

Associated Press (2007), “Ireland: Another metric system fault,” New York Times,
November 1.

Bar-Hillel, Maya (1980), “The base-rate fallacy in probability judgments,” Acta
Psychologica, 44 (3), 211-33.

Baron, Jonathan and John C. Hershey (1988), “Outcome bias in decision evaluation,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54 (4), 569-79.

Becker, Gary S. (1976), The Economic Approach to Human Behavior, Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.

Beckett, Samuel (1989), Nohow On, London: Calder.

Bentham, Jeremy (1996 [1789]), An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

===== PAGE 323 =====

304 Bibliography

Binmore, Ken (1999), “Why experiment in economics?,” The Economic Journal, 109
(453), F16-24,

(2007), Game Theory: A Very Short Introduction, New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.

Blackburn, Simon (2001), Being Good: A Short Introduction to Ethics, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Boethius, (1999 [c 524]), The Consolations of Philosophy, Rev. ed., Victor Watts, trans.,
London: Penguin Books.

Brooks, David (2008), “The behavioral revolution,” New York Times, October 28, p. A31.

Buehler, Roger, Dale Griffin, and Michael Ross (1994), “Exploring the ‘planning fallacy’: Why people underestimate their task completion times,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 67 (3), 366-81.

Burroughs, William S, (1977 [1953]), Junky, Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin
Books.

Camerer, Colin F. (2003), Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction,
New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec (2005), “Neuroeconomics: How neuroscience can inform economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 43 (1), 9-64.

, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard H. Thaler (1997), “Labor
supply of New York City cabdrivers: One day at a time,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112 (2), 407-41.

Caplan, Bryan (2013), “Nudge, policy, and the endowment effect,” http:/ /econlog.
econlib.org /archives/2013/07 /nudge_policy_an.html. Accessed February 9, 2015.

Chetty, Raj (2015) “Behavioral economics and public policy: A pragmatic perspective,”
American Economic Review, 105 (5), 1-33.

Consumer Federation of America (2006), “Press Release: How Americans view personal wealth vs. how financial planners view this wealth,” January 9.

Davis, John B. (2011), Individuals and Identity in Economics, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Dawes, Robyn M. and Richard H. Thaler (1988), “Anomalies: Cooperation,” The
Journal of Econontic Perspectives, 2 (3), 187-97.

Dixit, Avinash K., Susan Skeath, and David Reiley (2009), Games of Strategy, 3rd ed.,
New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Co.

Durlauf, Steven N. and Lawrence Blume (2010), Behavioural and Experimental Economics,
New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.

Earman, John and Wesley C. Salmon (1992), “The confirmation of scientific hypotheses,” in Merrilee H. Salmon, John Earman, Clark Glymour, James G. Lennox,
Peter Machamer, J. E. McGuire, John D. Norton, Wesley C. Salmon, and Kenneth F.
Schaffner, eds., Introduction to the Philosophy of Science, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, pp. 7-41.

Ellsberg, Daniel (1961), “Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economtics, 75 (4), 643-69.

Englich, Birthe, Thomas Mussweiler, and Fritz Strack (2006), “Playing dice with criminal sentences: The influence of irrelevant anchors on experts’ judicial decision making,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32 (2), 188-200.

Epicurus (2012 [c 300 BCE]), The Art of Happiness, George K. Strodach, trans., London:
Penguin Books.

Farhi, Paul (2010), “Juan Williams at odds with NPR over dismissal,” The Washington
Post, October 22, p. C1.

Finucane, Melissa L., Ali Alhakami, Paul Slovic, and Stephen M. Johnson (2000),
“The affect heuristic in judgments of risks and benefits,” Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 13 (1), 1-17.

Fischhoff, Baruch (1975), “Hindsight is not equal to foresight: The effect of outcome
knowledge on judgment under uncertainty,” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 1 (3), 288-99.

===== PAGE 324 =====

Bibliography 305

, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein (1977), “Knowing with certainty: The
appropriateness of extreme confidence,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 3 (4), 552-64.

FOX6 WBRC (2009), “Tension builds around courthouses’ reopening,” October 8.

Francis, David (2014), “DOD is stuck with a flawed $1.5 trillion fighter jet,” Fiscal Times,
February 18, http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/ Articles/2014/02/18/DOD-StuckFlawed-15-Trillion-Fighter-Jet. Accessed February 20, 2015.

Frank, Robert H. (2005), “The opportunity cost of economics education,” New York
Times, September 1, p. C2.

, Thomas Gilovich, and Dennis T. Regan (1993), “Does studying economics
inhibit cooperation?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7 (2), 159-71.

Frank, Thomas (2007), “Security arsenal adds behavior detection,” USA Today,
September 25, p. B1.

Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue (2002), “Time discounting and time preference: A critical review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 40 (2),
351401.

Friedman, Milton and Rose D, Friedman (1984), Tyranny of the Status Quo, San Diego,
CA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Gardner, Sarah (2012) “Nevada’s boom and bust economy,” January 31, http://www.
marketplace.org / topics /elections /real-economy /nevada%E2%80%99s-boom-andbust-economy. Accessed March 23, 2015.

Gigerenzer, Gerd and Daniel G. Goldstein (1996), “Reasoning the fast and frugal way:
Models of bounded rationality,” Psychological Review, 103 (4), 650-69.

Gilbert, Daniel (2006), Stumbling on Happiness, New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.

Goncharov, Ivan Aleksandrovich (1915 [1859]) Oblomov, C. J. Hogarth, trans., New
York, NY: The Macmillan Company.

Goodreads.com (2013), “What makes you put down abook?,” July 9, http:/ /www.good.
reads.com/blog / show /424-what-makes-you-put-down-a-book. Accessed February 20,
2015.

Hafner, Katie (2006), “In Web world, rich now envy the superrich,” New York Times,
November 21, p. A5.

Haisley, Emily, Romel Mostafa, and George Loewenstein (2008), “Subjective relative
income and lottery ticket purchases,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21 (3),
283-295.

Hampton, Isaac (2012), The Black Officer Corps: A History of Black Military Advancement
from Integration through Vietnam, New York, NY: Routledge.

Harsanyi, John C. (1975), “Can the maximin principle serve as a basis for morality?
A critique of John Rawls’s theory,” The American Political Science Review, 69 (2),
594-606.

Hastie, Reid and Robyn M. Dawes (2010), Rational Choice in an Uncertain World:
The Psychology of Judgment and Decision Making, 2nd ed., Los Angeles, CA: Sage
Publications.

Hayek, Friedrich A. (1933), “The trend of economic thinking,” Economica, (40), 121-37.

Heath, Chip and Amos Tversky (1991), “Preference and belief: Ambiguity and competence in choice under uncertainty,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4, 5-28.

Heuer, Richards J. (1999), Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, Washington, DC: Central
Intelligence Agency Center for the Study of Intelligence.

Heukelom, Floris (2014), Behavioral Economics: A History, New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

Hobbes, Thomas (1994 [1651]), Leviathan: With Selected Variants from the Latin Edition of
1668, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Pub. Co.

Huber, Joel, John W. Payne, and Christopher Puto (1982), “Adding asymmetrically
dominated alternatives: Violations of regularity and the similarity hypothesis,” The
Journal of Consumer Research, 9 (1), 90-8.

Hume, David (2000 [1739-40]), A Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

===== PAGE 325 =====

306 Bibliography

International Ergonomics Association (2015), “What is ergonomics,” http: / /www.iea.
cc/whats/index.html. Accessed February 9, 2015.

Jevons, W. Stanley (1965 [1871]), The Theory of Political Economy, 5th ed., New York, NY:
A.M. Kelley.

Jobs, Steve (2005), “Commencement address,” Stanford University, June 14, http://news.
stanford.edu/news/2005/june15/jobs-061505.html. Accessed March 30, 2015.

Kagel, John H. and Alvin E, Roth, eds. (1995), The Handbook of Experimental Economics,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Kahneman, Daniel (2011), Thinking, Fast and Slow, New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux.

and Amos Tversky (1979), “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk,”
Econometrica, 47 (2), 263-91.

, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler (1991), “Anomalies: The endowment
effect, loss aversion, and status quo bias,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5 (1),
193-206.

, Peter P, Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin (1997), “Back to Bentham? Explorations of
experienced utility,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (2), 375-405.

Keynes, John Maynard (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace.

Kierkegaard, Seren (2000 [1843]), “Either/or, a fragment of life”, in Howard V. Hong
and Edna H. Hong, eds., The Essential Kierkegaard, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, pp. 37-83.

Knoch, Daria, Alvaro Pascual-Leone, Kaspar Meyer, Valerie Treyer, and Ernst Fehr
(2006), “Diminishing reciprocal fairness by disrupting the right prefrontal cortex,”
Science, 314 (5800), 829-32.

Kruger, Justin and David Dunning (1999), “Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77 (6), 1121-34.

Krugman, Paul (2009), “How did economists get it so wrong?,” New York Times
Magazine, September 6, pp. 36-43.

Kuang, Cliff (2012), “The Google diet,” Fast Company, 164 (April), p. 48.

Lambert, Craig (2006), “The marketplace of perceptions,” Harvard Magazine, March—
April, 50-57, 93-95

Levitt, Steven D. and Stephen J. Dubner (2005), Freakonomics: A Rogue Economist
Explores the Hidden Side of Everything, New York, NY: William Morrow.

Lichtenstein, Sarah and Paul Slovic (1973), “Response-induced reversals of preference in gambling: An extended replication in Las Vegas,” Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 101 (1), 16-20.

Loewenstein, George, and Daniel Adler. 1995. “A Bias in the Prediction of Tastes.” The
Economic Journal 105 (431): 929-37. doi:10.2307 /2235159.

Loewenstein, George and Erik Angner (2003), “Predicting and indulging changing
preferences,” in George Loewenstein, Daniel Read, and Roy F. Baumeister, eds.,
Time and Decision: Economic and Psychological Perspectives on Intertemporal Choice, New
York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 351-91.

and Nachum Sicherman (1991), “Do workers prefer increasing wage profiles?,”
Journal of Labor Econontics, 9 (1), 67-84.

and Peter Ubel (2010), “Economists behaving badly,” New York Times, July 15,
p- A31.

, Daniel Read, and Roy E Baumeister, eds. (2003), Time and Decision: Economic
and Psychological Perspectives on Intertemporal Choice, New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.

Lord, Charles G., Lee Ross, and Mark R. Lepper (1979), “Biased assimilation and
attitude polarization: The effects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37 (11), 2098-2109.

Luce, R. Duncan and Howard Raiffa (1957), Games and Decisions: Introduction and
Critical Survey, New York, NY: Wiley.

===== PAGE 326 =====

Bibliography 307

Lyubomirsky, Sonja (2013) The Myths of Happiness, New York, NY: Penguin Books.

McKinley, Jesse (2009), “Schwarzenegger statement contains not-so-secret message,”
New York Times, October 29, p. A16.

Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D, Whinston, and Jerry R. Green (1995), Microeconontic
Theory, New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Meier, Stephan and Charles D. Sprenger (2012), “Time discounting predicts creditworthiness,” Psychological Science, 23 (1), 56-58.

Mischel, Walter (2014), The Marshmallow Test: Mastering Self-Control, New York, NY:
Little, Brown, and Company.

Myers, David G. (1992), The Pursuit of Happiness: Who Is Happy—and Why, New York,
NY: W. Morrow.

Nagourney, Adam (2011), “California bullet train project advances amid cries of boondoggle,” New York Times, November 27, p. A18.

Nickerson, Raymond S. (1998), “Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in
many guises,” Review of General Psychology, 2 (2), 175-220.

O'Brien, Miles (2004), “Apollo 11 crew recalls giant leap 35 years later,” CNN, July 21,
http:/ /www.cnn.com/2004/TECH/space/07/21/apollo.crew /. Accessed March 17, 2015

O'Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (2000), “The economics of immediate gratification,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 13 (2), 233-50.

Osborne, Martin J. and Ariel Rubinstein (1994), A Course in Game Theory, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Oskamp, Stuart (1982), “Overconfidence in case-study judgments,” in Daniel
Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and A. Tversky, eds., Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics
and Biases, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 287-93.

Paul, L. A. and Kieran Healy (2013), “What you can’t expect when you're expecting,”
February 27, http:/ /crookedtimber.org/2013/02/27 /what-you-cant-expect-whenyoure-expecting. Accessed March 17, 2015.

Peterson, Martin (2009), An Introduction to Decision Theory, New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

Pigou, Arthur C, (1952 [1920]), The Economics of Welfare, 4th ed., London: Macmillan.

Popper, Karl (2002 [1963]), Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific
Knowledge, London: Routledge.

Proust, Marcel (2002 [1925]), The Fugitive, Vol. 5 of In Search of Lost Time, New York, NY:
Allen Lane.

Ramsey, Frank P, (1928), “A mathematical theory of saving,” The Economtic Journal, 38
(152), 543-59.

Rawls, John (1971), A Theory of Justice, Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.

Read, Daniel and Barbara van Leeuwen (1998) “Predicting hunger: The effects of
appetite and delay on choice,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
76 (2), 189-205.

Redelmeier, Donald A. and Daniel Kahneman (1996), “Patients’ memories of painful
medical treatments: Real-time and retrospective evaluations of two minimally invasive procedures,” Pain, 66 (1), 3-8.

Ross, Don (2005), Economic Theory and Cognitive Science: Microexplanation, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Russell, Bertrand (1959), Conumon Sense and Nuclear Warfare, New York, NY: Simon and
Schuster.

de Sade, Donatien Alphonse Francois, Marquis (1889 [1791]}), Opus Sadicum: A
Philosophical Romance (Paris: Isidore Liseux). Originally published as Justine.

Schelling, Thomas C. (1960), The Strategy of Conflict, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Schwartz, Barry (2004), The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less, New York, NY: Ecco.

Seneca (2007 [c 49]), Seneca: Dialogues and Essays, John Davie, trans., Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Shafir, Eldar, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky (1993), “Reason-based choice,”
Cognition, 49 (1-2), 11-36.

===== PAGE 327 =====

308 Bibliography

Shang, Jen and Rachel Croson (2009), “A field experiment in charitable contribution:
The impact of social information on the voluntary provision of public goods,” The
Economic Journal, 119 (540), 1422-39.

Shelburne, Ramona (2014), “Kobe, Bill Clinton talk youth sports,” ESPN, January 14,
http:/ /espn.go.com/los-angeles /nba/story/_/id/10291171 /kobe-bryant-says-healthycompetition-keyyouth-sports. Accessed March 30, 2015.

Sidgwick, Henry (2012 [1874]), The Methods of Ethics, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Simonson, Itamar (1990), “The effect of purchase quantity and timing on varietyseeking behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research, 27 (2), 150-62.

Skyrms, Brian (1996), Evolution of the Social Contract, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Smith, Adam (1976 [1776]), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations,
5th ed., Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

(2002 [1759]), The Theory of Moral Sentiments, 6th ed., Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Smith, James P., John J. McArdle, and Robert Willis (2010), “Financial decision making and cognition in a family context,” The Economic Journal, 120 (548), F363-80.

Staw, Barry M. and Jerry Ross (1989), “Understanding behavior in escalation situations,” Science, 246 (4927), 216-20.

St. Petersburg Times (2001), “Dream car is a ‘Toy Yoda,” ’ July 28, http:/ /www.sptimes.
com/News/072801 /State/Dream_car_is_a__toy_Y.shtml. Accessed March 23, 2015.

Sunstein, Cass R. (2014), “Nudging: A very short guide,” Journal of Consumer Policy, 37
(4), 583-588.

Szuchman, Paula and Jenny Anderson (2011), Spousonomics: Using Economics to Master
Love, Marriage and Dirty Dishes, New York, NY: Random House.

Tabarrok, Alex (2013), “Stayaway from layaway,” October 24, http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2013/10/stayaway-from-layaway.html.
Accessed April 1, 2015.

Thaler, Richard H. (1980), “Toward a positive theory of consumer choice,” Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 1 (1), 39-60.

(1985), “Mental accounting and consumer choice,” Marketing Science, 4 (3),
199-214.

(2015), Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics, New York, NY: W. W.
Norton & Co.

and Eric J, Johnson (1990), “Gambling with the house money and trying to break
even: The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice,” Management Science, 36 (6),
643-60.

and Cass R. Sunstein (2008), Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Thompson, Derek (2013), “Money buys happiness and you can never have too much,
new research says,” The Atlantic, April 29, http://www.theatlantic.com/business/
archive/2013/04/money-buys-happiness-and-you-can-never-havetoo-much-newresearch-says/275380. Accessed March 17, 2015.

Todd, Peter M. and Gerd Gigerenzer (2000), “Précis of Simple Heuristics that Make us
Smart,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23 (5), 727-41.

Tomberlin, Michael (2009), “3rd lawsuit claims rigged jackpot,” The Birmingham News,
October 8, p. B1.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman (1971), “Belief in the law of small numbers,”
Psychological Bulletin, 76 (2), 105-110.

and (1974), “Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases,” Science,
185 (4157), 1124-31.
and (1981), “The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice,”
Science, 211 (4481), 453-58.
and (1983), “Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability judgment,” Psychological Review, 90 (4), 293-315.

===== PAGE 328 =====

Bibliography 309

and (1986), “Rational choice and the framing of decisions,” The Journal of

Business, 59 (4), 251-78.
and Eldar Shafir (1992), “The disjunction effect in choice under uncertainty,”
Psychological Science, 3 (5), 305-9.

US Department of Defense (2002), “DoD news briefing: Secretary Rumsfeld and
Gen. Myers,” February 21, http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?
transcriptid=2636. Accessed March 23, 2015

Ware, Bronnie (2012), The Top Five Regrets of the Dying: A Life Transformed by the Dearly
Departing, Carlsbad, CA: Hay House.

Wicksteed, Philip H. (2003 [1933]), The Common Sense of Political Economy, London:
Routledge.

Wilde, Oscar (1998 [1890]), The Picture of Dorian Gray, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Wilkinson, Nick and Matthias Klaes (2012), An Introduction to Behavioral Economics,
2nd ed., New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.

World RPS Society (2011), “How to beat anyone at Rock Paper Scissors,” http://www.
worldrps.com/how-to-beat-anyone-at-rock-paper-scissors/. Accessed April 13, 2015.

===== PAGE 329 =====

Index

30 Rock, 16

A
actuarially fair lottery, 139
adaptation, 210-211
addiction, 195, 216
rational, 187
Adler, Alfred, 112
affect heuristic, 119, 121
Affordable Care Act, 63
Afghanistan, 110, 125
African nations, 65-66
air fares, 162
airplane crashes, 115, 119
Alabama, 108
alarm clocks, 99
alcohol, 115, 196
Allais problem, 165-167
alternatives, set of, 15, 29
altruism, 243, 245-247
ambiguity aversion, 170, 177-178
American Economic Association (AEA), 69
analytical game theory, 221, 223, 237-238
and neoclassical economics, 240
anchor, 65
anchoring and adjustment, 65-66, 101, 105,
119
AND rule, 81, 87-88, 135
ant and the grasshopper, the, 187
anti-symmetry, 21, 32
anti-vaccination, 115
Apollo 11, 118
Aristotle, 43
Armstrong, Neil, 118
Asian disease problem, 153, 156-157
aspiration treadmill, 60-61
asymmetric paternalism, 257, 260
asymmetrical domination, 49
athletes, 61
attraction effect, 49
Auburn, 108
auxiliary assumptions, 268
availability, 114
availability bias, 116, 118, 124
availability cascades, 115
availability heuristic, 114-115, 119
aviation safety, 105
axiomatic theory, 13, 75
axioms, 13

of probability, 77, 94
of unconditional probability, 79-81

B
backward induction, 226-227
Ball, George, 44
base rate, 107
base-rate
base-rate fallacy, 107, 116
base-rate neglect, 107, 108, 124
battle of the sexes, 223-224, 229-230, 234
Bayes’s rule, 90-94
Bayes’s theorem, 90
Bayesian updating, 91-93
Beautiful Mind, A, 226
beauty-contest game, 249-250
Becker, Gary, 31, 187
Beckett, Samuel, 270
beer, 141, 202
behavior detection, 109-110
behavioral economics, 4-5, 258, 269-270
and data, 269
methods of, 7-8
vs. neoclassical economics, 262, 268
origins of, 5-6
behavioral game theory, 240, 251-252
behavioral welfare economics, 258-259
behaviorism, 6
Bentham, Jeremy, 5
beta-delta function, 197-198, 200-201
beta-delta model, 198
bias, 66, 101, 119
availability, 114-115
confirmation, 110-111
diversification, 211
impact, 212-213
projection, 211-212
status quo, 63-64
binary relations, 13-14
Binmore, Ken, 252
Biometric Identity Management, 110
birthday problem, 105
Blackjack, 102
Blackburn, Simon, 265
bliss, 24, 28, 144
Bloomberg ban, 262
Boeing 747-400, 102
Boethius, 176
bonds, 176

===== PAGE 330 =====

Bonds, Barry, 60
booksellers, online, 163
boyfriends, and sunk-cost fallacy, 43
brain tumors, 113-114
breast cancer, 106-107
brinkmanship, 232
British police, 108
Brooks, David, 257
Brown, Jerry, 45
Brutus, 17
Bryant, Kobe, 193
budget line, 26
budget set, 25-26, 46
buffet lines, 213
Bugatti, 49, 51
bullet trains, 45
bundles

consumption, 15

in indifference curves, 24
bundling, 57-58, 159-160
Buridan’s ass, 33
Burroughs, William S., 195

c
cab company, 107-108
cab drivers, 7, 39
Caesar, 17
cake, 199
division of, 241
calculator /jacket problem, 38, 156
calibration, 116-117
California, 22
California Medical Association, 167
Camerer, Colin FE, 7
cancellation, 177-178
cancer, 89, 106-107
cancer screening, 200
Caplan, Bryan, 264
car, used, 66
carpe diem, 192
cash bonuses, 59
cash-back offers, 164
centipede game, 237
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 122-123
certainty effect, 167-168, 173-174, 177-178
certainty equivalent, 147-148
charitable donations, 242
cheap talk, 226, 248
chemical substances, regulation of, 150
chess, 66-67, 221, 231-232
Chetty, Raj, 266
Chicago, 132
chicken, 232
hoice architect, 263
hoice under certainty, 13, 19, 25
hoice under risk, 129, 150-151, 153
hoice under uncertainty, 129-132, 149
hoice, paradox of, 40-41
hoice, reason-based, 51-52

2aeaeanne

Index 311

choice, theories of, 3-4
Christmas, 161, 185
Christmas presents, 161
Clapton, Eric, 69
cleaning, 206-207
climate change, 193
clutter, 64
Coase Theorem, 63
coding, in prospect theory, 164, 174
coffee shops, 59, 223, 228
cognitive revolution, 6
cognitive science, 6
coin toss, 170
Coke, 41-42
Cold War, 232
colon cancer, 200
colonoscopy, 200
combination, in prospect theory, 174
competence, 118, 120
competence hypothesis, 170, 177-178
competitors, 48-49
completeness, 17-19, 32
compound interest, 183-184
compromise effect, 51
concavity, 141, 154-155
Concorde fallacy, 42
conditional probability, 84-86, 106
confidence, 116. see also overconfidence
confirmation bias, 110-111, 118, 124
confirmation theory, 91
conjunction fallacy, 82, 102, 105, 124
Consolations of Philosophy, The, 176
conspiracy theories, 112
consumer choice, 47, 51-52
Consumer Federation of America, 84
consumption bundles, 15
contacts, 114-115
context effects, 51
contract killing, 227
contradiction, proofs by, 21
convexity, 142, 154-155
cooling-off periods, 261
cooperation, 227, 248
coordination game, impure, 224
coordination game, pure, 223
cost-benefit analysis, 55, 138, 193
costs

explicit, 34-35

opportunity, 34-35

sunk, 41-42
covenant, 227-228
crack cocaine, 173
credible vs. non-credible threats,

234-235

credit cards, 59, 182-184
credit scores, 194
Croson, Rachel, 7
CT scans, 113-114
cycling preferences, 24

===== PAGE 331 =====

312

Index

D
Daily Show, The, 77
Dante, 185
dating, 90, 131
Dawes, Robyn M., 248
de Menezes, Jean Charles, 108-109
de Morgans law, 22, 104-105
de Sade, Marquis, 3
Dead Poets Society, 192
Deal or No Deal, 138, 151
Dean, James, 232
death penalty, 110-111
decision trees, 34-35, 43
decision, theories of, 3-4
decoys, 49-50
default options, 261
defection, 226
deforestation, 226
delta function, 186
delta model, 186
Democrats, 63
Department of Defense (DoD), 44
Department of Homeland Security, 110
Depp, Johnny, 205, 206
descriptive theory, 3-4
diagnosticity, 109-110
dictator game, 240-242
dieting, 200
discount factor, 185, 193
discount rate, 191
discounting, hyperbolic, 198-199
diseases, 116
disjunction fallacy, 103, 105, 124
diversification, 98, 207
diversification bias, 211
Divina Commedia, 185
dominance, 49, 144
asymmetrical, 49
strict, 225
weak, 226
Donald Duck’s nephews, 14
Donner, Andrew, 170
doomsday machine, 236
Down syndrome, 108
Dr Strangelove, 236
drugs, 187, 200
Du Bois, WE.B., 71
Dulles International Airport, 241
Dulles, John Foster, 232
Dunning-Kruger effect, 120
duration neglect, 209
Dylan, Bob, 69

E
economics, 4-5
behavioral, 4-5
behavioral vs. neoclassical, 262, 268
criticism of, 31-32, 151
definition of, 6

and law, 139
nature of, 31-32
neoclassical, 4-5
and psychology, 6
economics professors, 208
Economist, The, 46,51
editing phase, of prospect theory, 174
Einstein, Albert, 184
Either/Or, 131
Ellsberg problem, 168-169
empathy gap, 212
empirical-reflective method, 213-214
endowment effect, 54
endowments, 61-62, 155
engine failure, 105
engineering, 98
envy, 243
Epicurus, 207, 217
equilibrium, 222
mixed strategy, 229-231
Nash, 223-224
refinements of, 234, 236
subgame-perfect, 236, 242
trembling-hand-perfect, 234
uniqueness of, 238
equiprobability, 77
ergonomics, 266
escalation situation, 43-44
Euripedes, 207
Europe, 63
evaluation phase, of prospect theory, 174
even odds, 83
EVERYTHING rule, 80
evidence, 91
evolutionary game theory, 232-233
exam scores, 60
exhaustive options, 25
expansion condition, 47
expected utility, 140-142, 165-166
expected value, 133-135, 138
expected-utility maximization, 142
expected-utility theory, 145, 170, 175
experimental economics, 189
explicit costs, 34-35
exponential discounting, 185, 186, 195-196
extensive form games, 235
extremeness aversion, 51

F

F-35, 44

fairness, 244

field experiments, 7
field study, 7
flooding, 104
Florida, 22, 122

focal points, 238
focusing illusion, 212-213
four-card swindle, 79
Fox News, 123

===== PAGE 332 =====

framing effects, 54, 153-155

Freakonomics, 173

free trade, 64-65

freedom, 40

Friedman, Milton and Rose, 64

frisbee factory, 88-90, 107

functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI), 8

fungibility, 164

G
gains, 154-155, 158, 160-161
gambler’s fallacy, 100
gambling, 7, 112, 133-135, 158
gambling vs. insurance, 171-172
game shows, 138, 151
game theory, 221
analytical, 221, 223
behavioral, 240
descriptive vs. normative, 237-238
evolutionary, 232-233
games, 222
dictator, 240-242
impure coordination, 224
pure coordination, 223
sequential, 235
ultimatum, 240-242
Gandhi, Mahatma, 252
Gangnam Style, 37
gasoline prices, 243
gelato, 13
gender discrimination, 95, 122
General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money, The, 249
genetic enhancement, 64
genetically modified organisms (GMOs),
123

Gervais, Ricky, 120
get-rich-quick schemes, 97
Gilbert, Daniel, 192, 214
Goodreads.com, 43
Google, 263

Greenspan, Alan, 257

H

Halloween candy, 207

Hangover: Part Il, The, 221

Hanukkah, 161

happiness, 27, 69, 213-214, 262

Harsanyi, John C., 132

hawk & dove, 232-233

Hayek, Friedrich A., 251, 258

health care, 63

hearing loss, 143

hedonic psychology, 5-6

hedonic-editing hypothesis, 164

Hendrix, Jimi, 100

heuristics, 66, 100-101, 119
affect, 119

Index 313

availability, 114-115, 119
representative, 119
heuristics-and-biases program, 66, 100, 119
hiking, 103-104
hindsight bias, 118, 124
Hobbes, Thomas, 227-228
Homer, 202
Horace, 192
hot-cold empathy gap, 212
housecleaning, 206-207
human-factors engineering, 266
Hume, David, 27
hyperbolic discounters, naifs vs. sophisticates, 203
hyperbolic discounting, 198-199, 216-217
hypothesis, 91
hypothetical choices, 7

I
impact bias, 212-213
impartial spectator, 188
impatience, 187, 200
implicit costs, 35
implicit interest, 183
impulsivity, 200
impure coordination game, 224
In Search of Lost Time, 112
in vitro fertilization (IVF), 122
incomplete relations, 17-19
increasing utility profiles, preference for,
207
independence, 81, 87-88, 98-99
index, 28-29
India, 226
indifference, 19, 144, 189-190
indifference curves, 24-25
reversible, 62
and utility, 30
indifference maps, 24
indirect proofs, 21
inequality aversion, 244
inside information, 112
insurance vs. gambling, 171-172
integration, 159
intelligence quotient (IQ), 64
intentions, 246
interactions, strategic, 221
interest, 181-183, 193-194
interest, simple vs. compound, 183-184
intransitive relations, 16-17
investments, 247
failed, 42
managing, 98
opportunity costs of, 35
and trust games, 247
Irish Republican Army (IRA), 104
Tron Bowl, 108
Iroquois, 188
irreflexivity, 21, 32

===== PAGE 333 =====

314

Index

J

jacket/calculator problem, 38, 156
jackpot, 94

jealousy, 112

Jesus nut, 102

jet, private, 105

Jevons, W. Stanley, 5-6

Jobs, Steve, 192

Johnson, President Lyndon B., 44
Joplin, Janis, 100

judgment, theory of, 98

Juliet, 19

junk bonds, 58

Junky, 195

jury, 110

justice, 131-132

K

Kabul, Afghanistan, 110
Kahneman, Daniel, 5, 119, 175
Keynes, John Maynard, 249, 265
Kierkegaard, Sgren, 131
“known knowns,” 171
Krugman, Paul, 257

Kubrick, Stanley, 236

L

laboratory experiments, 7

Langford, Larry, 94-95, 101

Large Hadron Collider, 77

law and economics, 139
behavioral, 258

Law and Order, 124

law of small numbers, 101

layaway, 203-204

Leviathan, 227-228

iability, 182

ibertarian, 257

ibertarian paternalism, 259-261
and slippery slope, 264-265

Lichtenstein, Sarah, 7

ife coaches, 177

ight/soft paternalism, 257

Linda problem, 76, 82, 105

Loewenstein, George, 265

logical symbols, 18

London, 108-109

loss aversion, 54-55, 59-60, 131

losses, 154-155, 158, 161-162

lottery, 99-100, 158, 175, 212

Lotto 6/49, 85, 102, 133-134, 139, 143, 149

love, 16-17, 81

luck, 81

luggage, 125

Lyubomirsky, Sonja, 214

M
magazine subscriptions, 46, 51
magnitude effect, 215

makeup exam, 221-222

malaria, 124

mammograms, 106-107

mandatory drug testing, 122

marginal utility, diminishing, 65, 141, 145
market equilibrium, 31

marriage, 32, 39-40

Marshmallow Test, The, 192

Marx brothers, 15-16

matching pennies, 229

materialism, 27, 31, 268

Matthew, Book of, 123

maximax criterion, 130

maximin criterion, 129-130, 132, 150
maximization, 30

MBA students, 46

measure, 28-29

mental accounting, 164, 177-178

menu dependence, 46-48, 51-52
menus, 25

meteorology, 117

microeconomics, 61-62, 240
minimax-risk criterion, 131
miswanting, 212

mixed strategy equilibrium, 229-231
money illusion, 54

money, diminishing marginal utility of, 141
Moneyball, 54

Monty Hall Problem, 79

morality, 46

Morrison, Jim, 100

Most Dangerous Man in America, The, 168
Mother Teresa, 3

movies, 71

mugs, 52, 63

multiple-choice tests, 96

Muslims, 123

mutually assured destruction (MAD), 236
mutually exclusive options, 25
mutually exclusive outcomes, 79-80

N
naifs, 203
Nash equilibrium, 223-224, 238
convergence on, 250
in mixed strategies, 229-231
and rationality, 226
refinements of, 234, 236
Nash, John, 226, 231
Nash’s Theorem, 231
National Public Radio (NPR), 123
nature preserves, 55
negative reciprocity, 246
negative time preference, 207
negative transitivity, 22
negotiations, failure of, 59
neighborhood cleanup, 249
neoclassical economics, 4-5, 151, 269
vs. behavioral economics, 262, 268

===== PAGE 334 =====

and game theory, 240, 251-252
and social preferences, 245-246
neuroeconomics, 8
New York City, 7, 39, 132, 262
New York Times, 45, 61
newsletters, 97
newspaper boxes, 141
No Exit, 16-17
Nobel Memorial Prize, 5, 248-249
non-diagnosticity, 107
normative theory, 3-4, 68, 75
NOT rule, 80-81, 104-105
nuclear arms races, 226
nuclear facilities, Iranian, 125
nuclear meltdowns, 98, 115
nudge agenda, 257-261, 266
nudges, 260
numeracy, 8-9

ce]

Obamacare, 63

objectivism, 257

Oblomoy, Ilya Ilyich, 196
Oblomovitis, 199

odds, 76-77, 83, 117

Oliver, John, 77

On the Shortness of Life, 192
online booksellers, 163
operationalism, 6
ophthalmologist, 114-115
opportunity costs, 34-36, 40, 59-60
optometrist, 114

or rule, 79, 103

ordinal utility, 30

ostrich farms, 157

Ostrom, Elinor, 248-249
outcome bias, 176

outcome bundling, 159-162
outcome space, 76
outcomes, 76, 99, 150, 159
outcomes, equiprobable, 77
outlet malls, 44
overconfidence, 117-118, 124

P

pain, 5-6, 55

Pakistan, 226

paradox of choice, 40-41
paradoxes of rationality, 238
Pareto dominance, 226
Pareto optimality, 226
parking, 137, 139

Pascal, Blaise, 144

Pascal’s wager, 144
paternalism, libertarian, 259-261
patience, 186-187

payday loans, 184-185
payoff matrix, 222
peak-end rule, 208

Index 315

Pentagon Papers, 168
Pepsi, 41-42
Picture of Dorian Gray, The, 131
Piggly Wiggly, 41
Pigou, A.C., 191-192
Pitt, Brad, 54
plane accident, 132
planning, 102
planning fallacy, 102-103, 108
plastic bags, 71-72
players, 222
pleasure, 5-6, 27, 191-192, 207
poker, 4
policy, and nudge agendas, 266
political campaigns, 50-51
political reform, 39
pollution, 226
polyps, 200
Pope, Alexander, 118
Popper, Karl, 112
positive reciprocity, 246
positive time preference, 207
posterior probability, 91
predictability, vs. rationality, 269
preface paradox, 105
preference cycling, 24
preference ordering, 24, 28
preference relations, 14-15
anti-symmetric, 21
complete, 17-19
incomplete, 17-19
intransitive, 16-17
irreflexive, 21
rational, 15-16
reflexive, 18-19
strict/strong, 20
symmetric, 19
transitive, 15-17
weak, 14, 21
preference, theory of, 6
preferences, 6, 13, 207
altruistic, 243
and decision making, 210
vs. happiness, 262
inequality-averse, 244
Rawlsian, 244
social, 243-245
stable, 31, 215
utilitarian, 244
pregnancy tests, 96-97
preproperation, 206
President of the US, 17
principal, 181
prior probability, 91
priors, washing out of the, 110
prisoners’ dilemma, 224-225, 227, 245, 247
Prius owner, 243
probability, 76-77
axioms of, 77

===== PAGE 335 =====

316

Index

probability (continued)
conditional, 84-86, 106
posterior, 91
prior, 91
total, 88-89
unconditional, 79-81
probability function, 76
probability matching, 121-122
probability weighting, 171-172
probability-weighting function, 172-174,
176
probability, theory of, 75-77, 93-94, 120
procedure invariance, 67
process measures, 8
process-tracing software, 8
procrastination, 181, 202, 206
profiles, preference over, 207
projection bias, 211-212
projects, failed, 158
proof by contradiction, 21
proofs, 19-20, 23, 31
proofs, indirect, 21
proposer, 240
prospect evaluation, 157
prospect theory, 55, 174, 261
and bundling, 160
and probability weighting, 172-173
Proust, Marcel, 112
psychology, 5-6, 269
Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, 122-123
public economics, behavioral, 258
public health, 153
public safety, 39
public-goods games, 247-248
Publix, 41
pure coordination game, 223
pure strategies, Nash equilbrium in, 223

Q
quasi-hyperbolic discounting, 198-199

R
racism, 112
rail projects, 103
rain, 129
raises, 60
Ramsey, Frank P., 192
Rand, Ayn, 257
range of probabilities axiom, 77
rational addiction, 187, 195
rational preference relation, 15-16
rational-choice theory, 4, 13, 68
rationality, 4, 26-27
and analytical game theory, 238
definition of, 4
and discounting, 191-192
and maximizing utility, 30
and Nash equilibrium, 226
nature of, 175-176

and opportunity costs, 35-36, 40
and outcomes, 150
vs. predictability, 269
and time discounting, 215
under uncertainty, 131
rationality, paradoxes of, 238
ratios, 38
Rawls, John, 131-132, 244
Rawlsian preferences, 244
real estate, 34-35, 40
real-estate sales, 50, 59
real-estate markets, 250
reason-based choice, 51-52
Rebel Without a Cause, 232
receiver, 246-247
reciprocity, 246-247
reference-point phenomena, 54
reflexivity, 18-19, 32
regret, 131
regret aversion, 131, 165, 167
regulation, 150
relations, 13
binary, 13-14
ternary, 13-14
see also preference relations
relationships, failed, 43, 44
representation theorem, 29
representativeness heuristic, 100-101, 119
research and development (R&D), 41
responder, 240
retirement savings, 215-216, 261
return policies, 59
reversible indifference curves, 62
reward points, 164
risk, 129, 131, 149-150, 150-151
and expected-utility theory, 145
framing effects and, 153-155
risk assessment, 104
risk aversion, 145-146, 158, 159
risk preference, 146
robbery, 58
rock-paper-scissors, 231, 250-251
Roma, 124
Romeo, 19
room service, 38
root beer, 17
roulette, 99, 136-137, 165-166
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 233
tule of total probability, 89
Rumsfeld, Donald H., 171
Russell, Bertrand, 232
Russian roulette, 175

Ss

S-shaped value function, 155-156, 175
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 16-17

SAT test, 94

satisfaction, 28-29

Save More Tomorrow (SMarT) Program, 261

===== PAGE 336 =====

savings, 176-177, 215-216
savings behavior, 181
Schelling, Thomas C., 238
Schumpeter, Joseph, 124
Schwartz, Barry, 40
Schwarzenegger, Governor Arnold, 95-96
scuba diving certification, 89, 90
segregation, 159

self-control problems, 203
self-interest, 27

selfishness, 27, 31

selfishness axiom, 246, 268
sender, 246-247

Seneca, 60-61, 71, 192, 216
sequential games, 235

set of alternatives, 15, 29

sex, unsafe, 115, 187

sexism, 112

sexual arousal, 212

Shang, Jen, 7

Sidgwick, Henry, 213, 217
sign effect, 215

silver lining, 164, 177-178
simple interest, 183
simplification, in prospect theory, 174
slippery slope, 264-265

Slovic, Paul, 7

small numbers, law of, 101
Smith, Adam, 5, 55, 120, 188, 213, 226
smoking, 196, 200

snacks, 202

social comparisons, 61

social preferences, 243-246
soda ban, 262

soft drinks, 202

softball, 95

Sophie's Choice, 33
sophisticates, 203

speeding, 54, 124
Spousonomtics, 231

spread, preference for, 207

St Petersburg gamble, 141-142
St Petersburg paradox, 140, 148
stable preferences, 31

stag hunt, 233

Stalin, Joseph, 162

standard economics, 4

state of nature, 227

state of the world, 129

status quo bias, 63-64
stereotypes, 112

Stevenson, Betsey, 69

stock market, 58, 112, 249
stocks, 98, 177, 221
storytelling, 115

strategic interaction, 221
strategy, 222

strategy profile, 222
strict/strong preference, 20

Index 317

subgame, 235
subgame-perfect equilibrium, 236, 242
substitution, 119

suggested retail price, 67

sunk costs, 41-42, 59-60
sunk-cost fallacy, 42, 45-46
sunset provisions, 64
Sunstein, Cass R., 262, 264, 266
sure thing, 166

sure-thing principle, 166, 169
SUV owners, 243

Sydney Opera House, 103
symbols, logical, 18

symmetry, 19, 32

T
targets, 48-49
taxes, 59, 63, 163-164
tea, cups of, 23
tennis, 170, 231
Tennyson, Alfred, Lord, 131
ternary relations, 13-14
terror, war on, 39, 108-109
terrorism suspect, 108-109
terrorism, probability of, 104
terrorist attacks, 115
test, multiple-choice, 96
testimony, 107-108
Thaler, Richard H., 248, 266
Thanksgiving, 144
Thatcher, Margaret, 104
heories of choice, 3-4
heories of decision, 3-4
heory of choice under certainty, 19, 25
heory of choice under risk, 129, 150-151,
153
heory of choice under uncertainty, 129-132,
149
theory of expected utility, 140-142, 149-150,
175
and ambiguity aversion, 170
and Ellsberg problem, 169
and risk, 145
heory of expected value, 149-150
heory of judgment, 98
Theory of Moral Sentiments, 188
heory of preference, 6
heory of probability, 75-77
heory of rational choice, 4, 13, 26-27, 68
and maximizing utility, 30
and opportunity costs, 35-36, 40
under uncertainty, 131
heory, axiomatic, 13, 75
heory, confirmation, 91
heory, evolutionary game, 232-233
heory, game, 221
heory, normative, 75
heory, probability, 93-94, 120
hreats, credible vs. non-credible, 234-235

ql
ql
ql
ql

=

peo ch

=== ==

===== PAGE 337 =====

318

Index

three-card swindle, 78-79

ties, in preference relations, 19

time consistency, 196

time discounting, 185, 215

time inconsistency, 195

time preference, 185, 207

time, and decision making, 181, 214-215

tire sales, 45

toasters, 67

Top Five Regrets of Dying, The, 131

total probability, 88-89

Toyota/Toy Yoda, 56, 57

traffic signs, 260, 261

Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation, 8

transitivity, 15-17, 22

Transportation Security Administration
(TSA), 109

trembling, 234

trembling-hand perfection, 233-234, 266

trinkets, 5

trust, 247-249

trust games, 246-247

Tversky, Amos, 175

twins, 101

U
Ubel, Peter, 265
ultimatum game, 240-242, 245, 246
Ulysses, 202
umbrella, 144
uncertainty, 129-132, 149-150
unconditional probability, 79-81
underprediction of adaptation, 210-211
unicorns, 141
United Nations, 14, 65
universe, 14-16
unpaid work, 39
unsafe sex, 115, 187
US-VISIT program, 110
usury, 185
utilitarian preferences, 244
utility, 28-30
expected, 140-142, 145
functions, 28-29, 53-54, 147-148, 269
marginal, 65, 141
maximization, 30, 142
and opportunity costs, 35-36, 39-40
ordinal, 30
streams, 185-186, 188-189

Vv

vaccines, 115

value function, 55-57, 155-156, 159-161
value function, S-shaped, 155-156, 175
value, expected, 133-135, 149-150
variation, preference for, 207

veil of ignorance, 132

Vietnam War, 44

violent crime, 115, 124

Ww

Wagner, Walter, 77

Wail Street Journal, 141

“war of all against all,” 228
warranties, 139, 172

wars, losing, 44, 158

washing dishes, 248

washing out of the priors, 110
weak preference relations, 14, 21
wealth effects, 158-159

Wealth of Nations, The, 5

welfare criterion, 262

welfare economics, behavioral, 258
White, Richard, 45

Wicksteed, Philip, 201

Wicksteed’s blanket, 201

Wilde, Oscar, 131

Williams, Juan, 123

Williams, Robin, 192
willingness-to-accept (WTA), 52, 55, 147
willingness-to-pay (WTP), 52, 55, 147
windfalls, 38

wine, 33, 67

wingman or wingwoman, 50-51
Wolfers, Justin, 69

World Health Organization, 116
Worstward Ho, 270

Y

yoga, 70

YOLO (You Only Live Once) criterion,
130

York, Byron, 63

youth sports, 193

Zz
zero expected value, 177
zero-sum game, 229
