CHAPTER 3The Pleasure-Pain BalanceNeuroscientific advances in the last fifty to one hundred years, including advances in biochemistry, new imaging techniques, and the emergence of computational biology, shed light on fundamental reward processes. By better understanding the mechanisms that govern pain and pleasure, we can gain new insight into why and how too much pleasure leads to pain.DopamineThe main functional cells of the brain are called neurons. They communicate with each other at synapses via electrical signals and neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitters are like baseballs. The pitcher is the presynaptic neuron. The catcher is the postsynaptic neuron. The space between pitcher and catcher is the synaptic cleft. Just as the ball is thrown between pitcher and catcher, neurotransmitters bridge the distance between neurons: chemical messengers regulating electrical signals in the brain. There are many important neurotransmitters, but letХs focus on dopamine.NEUROTRANSMITTER Dopamine was first identified as a neurotransmitter in the human brain in 1957 by two scientists working independently: Arvid Carlsson and his team in Lund, Sweden, and Kathleen Montagu, based outside of London. Carlsson went on to win the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Dopamine is not the only neurotransmitter involved in reward processing, but most neuroscientists agree it is among the most important. Dopamine may play a bigger role in the motivation to get a reward than the pleasure of the reward itself. Wanting more than liking. Genetically engineered mice unable to make dopamine will not seek out food, and will starve to death even when food is placed just inches from their mouth. Yet if food is put directly into their mouth, they will chew and eat the food, and seem to enjoy it. Debates about differences between motivation and pleasure notwithstanding, dopamine is used to measure the addictive potential of any behavior or drug. The more dopamine a drug releases in the brainХs reward pathway (a brain circuit that links the ventral tegmental area, the nucleus accumbens, and the prefrontal cortex), and the faster it releases dopamine, the more addictive the drug.DOPAMINE REWARD PATHWAYS IN THE BRAIN This is not to say that high-dopamine substances literally contain dopamine. Rather, they trigger the release of dopamine in our brainХs reward pathway. For a rat in a box, chocolate increases the basal output of dopamine in the brain by 55 percent, sex by 100 percent, nicotine by 150 percent, and cocaine by 225 percent. Amphetamine, the active ingredient in the street drugs Тspeed,У Тice,У and ТshabuУ as well as in medications like Adderall that are used to treat attention deficit disorder, increases the release of dopamine by 1,000 percent. By this accounting, one hit off a meth pipe is equal to ten orgasms.REWARDS AND DOPAMINE RELEASEPleasure and Pain Are Co-LocatedIn addition to the discovery of dopamine, neuroscientists have determined that pleasure and pain are processed in overlapping brain regions and work via an opponent-process mechanism. Another way to say this is that pleasure and pain work like a balance. Imagine our brains contain a balanceСa scale with a fulcrum in the center. When nothing is on the balance, itХs level with the ground. When we experience pleasure, dopamine is released in our reward pathway and the balance tips to the side of pleasure. The more our balance tips, and the faster it tips, the more pleasure we feel. But hereХs the important thing about the balance: It wants to remain level, that is, in equilibrium. It does not want to be tipped for very long to one side or another. Hence, every time the balance tips toward pleasure, powerful self-regulating mechanisms kick into action to bring it level again. These self-regulating mechanisms do not require conscious thought or an act of will. They just happen, like a reflex. I tend to imagine this self-regulating system as little gremlins hopping on the pain side of the balance to counteract the weight on the pleasure side. The gremlins represent the work of homeostasis: the tendency of any living system to maintain physiologic equilibrium. Once the balance is level, it keeps going, tipping an equal and opposite amount to the side of pain. In the 1970s, social scientists Richard Solomon and John Corbit called this reciprocal relationship between pleasure and pain the opponent-process theory: ТAny prolonged or repeated departures from hedonic or affective neutrality . . . have a cost.У That cost is an Тafter-reactionУ that is opposite in value to the stimulus. Or as the old saying goes, What goes up must come down. As it turns out, many physiologic processes in the body are governed by similar self-regulating systems. For example, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Ewald Hering, and others have demonstrated how color perception is governed by an opponent-process system. Looking closely at one color for a sustained period spontaneously produces an image of its ТopposingУ color in the viewerХs eye. Stare at a green image against a white background for a period of time, and then look away at a blank white page, and you will see how your brain creates a red afterimage. The perception of green gives way in succession to the perception of red. When green is turned on, red canХt be, and vice versa.Tolerance (Neuroadaptation)WeХve all experienced craving in the aftermath of pleasure. Whether itХs reaching for a second potato chip or clicking the link for another round of video games, itХs natural to want to re-create those good feelings or try not to let them fade away. The simple solution is to keep eating, or playing, or watching, or reading. But thereХs a problem with that. With repeated exposure to the same or similar pleasure stimulus, the initial deviation to the side of pleasure gets weaker and shorter and the after-response to the side of pain gets stronger and longer, a process scientists call neuroadaptation. That is, with repetition, our gremlins get bigger, faster, and more numerous, and we need more of our drug of choice to get the same effect. Needing more of a substance to feel pleasure, or experiencing less pleasure at a given dose, is called tolerance. Tolerance is an important factor in the development of addiction. For me, reading the Twilight saga for a second time was pleasurable but not as pleasurable as the first time. By the fourth time I read it (yes, I read the entire saga four times), my pleasure was significantly diminished. The rereading never quite measured up to that first go-round. Furthermore, each time I read it, I was left with a deeper sense of dissatisfaction in its aftermath and a stronger desire to regain the feeling I had while reading it the first time. As I became ТtolerantУ to Twilight, I was forced to seek out newer, more potent forms of the same drug to try to recapture that earlier feeling. With prolonged, heavy drug use, the pleasure-pain balance eventually gets weighted to the side of pain. Our hedonic (pleasure) set point changes as our capacity to experience pleasure goes down and our vulnerability to pain goes up. You might think of this as the gremlins camped out on the pain side of the balance, inflatable mattresses and portable barbecues in tow. I became acutely aware of this effect of high-dopamine addictive substances on the brainХs reward pathway in the early 2000s, when I started seeing more patients coming in to clinic on high-dose, long-term opioid therapy (think OxyContin, Vicodin, morphine, fentanyl) for chronic pain. Despite prolonged and high-dose opioid medications, their pain had only gotten worse over time. Why? Because exposure to opioids had caused their brain to reset its pleasure-pain balance to the side of pain. Now their original pain was worse, and they had new pain in parts of their body that used to be pain free. This phenomenon, widely observed and verified by animal studies, has come to be called opioid-induced hyperalgesia. Algesia, from the Greek word algesis, means sensitivity to pain. WhatХs more, when these patients tapered off opioids, many of them experienced improvements in pain. Neuroscientist Nora Volkow and colleagues have shown that heavy, prolonged consumption of high-dopamine substances eventually leads to a dopamine deficit state. Volkow examined dopamine transmission in the brains of healthy controls compared to people addicted to a variety of drugs two weeks after they stopped using. The brain images are striking. In the brain pictures of healthy controls, a kidney-bean-shaped area of the brain associated with reward and motivation lights up bright red, indicating high levels of dopamine neurotransmitter activity. In the pictures of people with addiction who stopped using two weeks prior, the same kidney-bean-shaped region of the brain contains little or no red, indicating little or no dopamine transmission. As Dr. Volkow and her colleagues wrote, ТThe decreases in DA D2 receptors in the drug abusers, coupled to the decreases in DA release, would result in a decreased sensitivity of reward circuits to stimulation by natural rewards.У Once this happens, nothing feels good anymore. To put it another way, the players on Team Dopamine take their balls and their mitts and go home.EFFECTS OF ADDICTION ON DOPAMINE RECEPTORS In the approximately two years in which I compulsively consumed romance novels, I eventually reached a place where I could not find a book I enjoyed. It was as if I had burned out my novel-reading pleasure center, and no book could revive it. The paradox is that hedonism, the pursuit of pleasure for its own sake, leads to anhedonia, which is the inability to enjoy pleasure of any kind.Reading had always been my primary source of pleasure and escape, so it was a shock and a grief when it stopped working. Even then it was hard to abandon. My patients with addiction describe how they get to a point where their drug stops working for them. They get no high at all anymore. Yet if they donХt take their drug, they feel miserable. The universal symptoms of withdrawal from any addictive substance are anxiety, irritability, insomnia, and dysphoria. A pleasure-pain balance tilted to the side of pain is what drives people to relapse even after sustained periods of abstinence. When our balance is tilted to the pain side, we crave our drug just to feel normal (a level balance). The neuroscientist George Koob calls this phenomenon Тdysphoria driven relapse,У wherein a return to using is driven not by the search for pleasure but by the desire to alleviate physical and psychological suffering of protracted withdrawal. HereХs the good news. If we wait long enough, our brains (usually) readapt to the absence of the drug and we reestablish our baseline homeostasis: a level balance. Once our balance is level, we are again able to take pleasure in everyday, simple rewards. Going for a walk. Watching the sun rise. Enjoying a meal with friends.People, Places, and ThingsThe pleasure-pain balance is triggered not only by reexposure to the drug itself but also by exposure to cues associated with drug use. In Alcoholics Anonymous, the catchphrase to describe this phenomenon is people, places, and things. In the world of neuroscience, this is called cue-dependent learning, also known as classical (Pavlovian) conditioning. Ivan Pavlov, who won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1904, demonstrated that dogs reflexively salivate when presented with a slab of meat. When the presentation of meat is consistently paired with the sound of a buzzer, the dogs salivate when they hear the buzzer, even if no meat is immediately forthcoming. The interpretation is that the dogs have learned to associate the slab of meat, a natural reward, with the buzzer, a conditioned cue. WhatХs happening in the brain? By inserting a detection probe into a ratХs brain, neuroscientists can demonstrate that dopamine is released in the brain in response to the conditioned cue (e.g., a buzzer, metronome, light) well before the reward itself is ingested (e.g., cocaine injection). The pre-reward dopamine spike in response to the conditioned cue explains the anticipatory pleasure we experience when we know good things are coming.DOPAMINE LEVELS: ANTICIPATION AND CRAVING Right after the conditioned cue, brain dopamine firing decreases not just to baseline levels (the brain has a tonic level of dopamine firing even in the absence of rewards), but below baseline levels. This transient dopamine mini-deficit state is what motivates us to seek out our reward. Dopamine levels below baseline drive craving. Craving translates into purposeful activity to obtain the drug. My colleague Rob Malenka, an esteemed neuroscientist, once said to me that Тthe measure of how addicted a laboratory animal is comes down to how hard that animal is willing to work to obtain its drugСby pressing a lever, navigating a maze, climbing up a chute.У IХve found the same to be true for humans. Not to mention that the entire cycle of anticipation and craving can occur outside the threshold of conscious awareness. Once we get the anticipated reward, brain dopamine firing increases well above tonic baseline. But if the reward we anticipated doesnХt materialize, dopamine levels fall well below baseline. Which is to say, if we get the expected reward, we get an even bigger spike. If we donХt get the expected reward, we experience an even bigger plunge.DOPAMINE LEVELS: ANTICIPATION AND CRAVING WeХve all experienced the letdown of unmet expectations. An expected reward that fails to materialize is worse than a reward that was never anticipated in the first place. How does cue-induced craving translate to our pleasure-pain balance? The balance tips to the side of pleasure (a dopamine mini spike) in anticipation of future reward, immediately followed by a tip to the side of pain (a dopamine mini deficit) in the aftermath of the cue. The dopamine deficit is craving and drives drug-seeking behavior. Over the past decade, significant advances have been made in understanding the biological cause of pathological gambling, leading to the reclassification of gambling disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th edition) as addictive disorders. Studies indicate that dopamine release as a result of gambling links to the unpredictability of the reward delivery, as much as to the final (often monetary) reward itself. The motivation to gamble is based largely on the inability to predict the reward occurrence, rather than on financial gain. In a 2010 study, Jakob Linnet and his colleagues measured the dopamine release in people addicted to gambling and in healthy controls while winning and losing money. There were no distinct differences between the two groups when they won money; however, when compared to the control group, the pathological gamblers showed a marked increase in dopamine levels when they lost money. The amount of dopamine released in the reward pathway was at its highest when the probability of losing and winning was nearly identical (50 percent)Сrepresenting maximum uncertainty. Gambling disorder highlights the subtle distinction between reward anticipation (dopamine release prior to reward) and reward response (dopamine release after or during reward). My patients with gambling addiction have told me that while playing, a part of them wants to lose. The more they lose, the stronger the urge to continue gambling, and the stronger the rush when they winСa phenomenon described as Тloss chasing.У I suspect something similar is going on with social media apps, where the response of others is so capricious and unpredictable that the uncertainty of getting a ТlikeУ or some equivalent is as reinforcing as the ТlikeУ itself.СThe brain encodes long-term memories of reward and their associated cues by changing the shape and size of dopamine-producing neurons. For example, the dendrites, the branches off the neuron, become longer and more numerous in response to high-dopamine rewards. This process is called experience-dependent plasticity. These brain changes can last a lifetime and persist long after the drug is no longer available. Researchers explored the effects of cocaine exposure on rats by injecting them with the same amount of cocaine on successive days for a week and measuring how much they ran in response to each injection. A rat injected with cocaine will run across the cage instead of keeping to the periphery like normal rats do. The amount of running can be measured by using beams of light that project across the cage. The more times the rat breaks the beams of light, the more itХs running. The scientists found that with each successive day of cocaine exposure, the rats progressed from a lively jog on the first day, to an outright running frenzy on the last, showing a cumulative sensitization to the effects of cocaine. Once the researchers stopped administering cocaine, the rats stopped running. One year laterСa veritable lifetime for a ratСthe scientists reinjected the rats with cocaine one time, and the rats were immediately running as they had on the final day of the original experiment. When the scientists examined the ratsХ brains, they saw cocaine-induced changes in the ratsХ reward pathways consistent with persistent cocaine sensitization. These findings show that a drug like cocaine can alter the brain forever. Similar findings have been shown with other addictive substances, from alcohol to opioids to cannabis. In my clinical work I see people who struggle with severe addiction slipping right back into compulsive use with a single exposure, even after years of abstinence. This may occur because of persistent sensitization to the drug of choice, the distant echoes of earlier drug use.СLearning also increases dopamine firing in the brain. Female rats housed for three months in a diverse, novel, and stimulating environment show a proliferation of dopamine-rich synapses in the brainХs reward pathway compared to rats housed in standard laboratory cages. The brain changes that occur in response to a stimulating and novel environment are similar to those seen with high-dopamine (addictive) drugs. But if the same rats are pretreated with a stimulant such as methamphetamine, a highly addictive drug, before entering the enriched environment, they fail to show the synaptic changes seen previously with exposure to the enriched environment. These findings suggest that methamphetamine limits a ratХs ability to learn. HereХs some good news. My colleague Edie Sullivan, a world expert on alcoholХs effects on the brain, has studied the process of recovery from addiction and discovered that although some brain changes due to addiction are irreversible, it is possible to detour around these damaged areas by creating new neural networks. This means that although the brain changes are permanent, we can find new synaptic pathways to create healthy behaviors. Meanwhile, the future holds tantalizing possibilities for ways to reverse the scars of addiction. Vincent Pascoli and his colleagues injected rats with cocaine, which demonstrated the expected behavioral changes (frenzied running), then used optogeneticsСa biological technique that involves the use of light to control neuronsСto reverse the synaptic brain changes caused by cocaine. Maybe someday optogenetics will be possible on human brains.The Balance Is Only a MetaphorIn real life, pleasure and pain are more complex than the workings of a balance. WhatХs pleasurable for one person may not be for another. Each person has their Тdrug of choice.У Pleasure and pain can occur simultaneously. For example, we can experience both pleasure and pain when eating spicy food. Not everyone starts out with a level balance: Those with depression, anxiety, and chronic pain start with a balance tipped to the side of pain, which may explain why people with psychiatric disorders are more vulnerable to addiction. Our sensory perception of pain (and pleasure) is heavily influenced by the meaning we ascribe to it. Henry Knowles Beecher (1904Р1976) served as a military doctor during World War II in North Africa, Italy, and France. He observed and reported on 225 soldiers with severe war-theater wounds. Beecher was strict with his study inclusion criteria, surveying only those men who Тhad one of five kinds of severe wounds chosen as representative; extensive peripheral soft-tissue injury, compound fracture of a long bone, a penetrated head, a penetrated chest, or a penetrated abdomen . . . were clear mentally, and . . . were not in shock at the time of questioning.У Beecher made a remarkable discovery. Three-quarters of these badly injured soldiers reported little or no pain in the immediate aftermath of their wounds, despite life-threatening injuries. He concluded that their physical pain was tempered by the emotional relief of escaping Тfrom an exceedingly dangerous environment, one filled with fatigue, discomfort, anxiety, fear and real danger of death.У Their pain, such as it was, gave them Тa ticket to the safety of the hospital.У By contrast, a case report from the British Medical Journal published in 1995 details the case of a twenty-nine-year-old construction worker who walked into the emergency room after landing footfirst on a fifteencentimeter nail, which was sticking up out of the top of his construction boot, having penetrated through leather, flesh, and bones. ТThe smallest movement of the nail was painful [and] he was sedated with fentanyl and midazolam,У powerful opioids and sedatives. But when the nail was pulled out from below and the boot removed, it became apparent that Тthe nail had penetrated between the toes: the foot was entirely uninjured.УСScience teaches us that every pleasure exacts a price, and the pain that follows is longer lasting and more intense than the pleasure that gave rise to it. With prolonged and repeated exposure to pleasurable stimuli, our capacity to tolerate pain decreases, and our threshold for experiencing pleasure increases. By imprinting instant and permanent memory, we are unable to forget the lessons of pleasure and pain even when we want to: hippocampal tattoos to last a lifetime. The phylogenetically uber-ancient neurological machinery for processing pleasure and pain has remained largely intact throughout evolution and across species. It is perfectly adapted for a world of scarcity. Without pleasure we wouldnХt eat, drink, or reproduce. Without pain we wouldnХt protect ourselves from injury and death. By raising our neural set point with repeated pleasures, we become endless strivers, never satisfied with what we have, always looking for more. But herein lies the problem. Human beings, the ultimate seekers, have responded too well to the challenge of pursuing pleasure and avoiding pain. As a result, weХve transformed the world from a place of scarcity to a place of overwhelming abundance. Our brains are not evolved for this world of plenty. As Dr. Tom Finucane, who studies diabetes in the setting of chronic sedentary feeding, said, ТWe are cacti in the rain forest.У And like cacti adapted to an arid climate, we are drowning in dopamine. The net effect is that we now need more reward to feel pleasure, and less injury to feel pain. This recalibration is occurring not just at the level of the individual but also at the level of nations. Which invites the question: How do we survive and thrive in this new ecosystem? How do we raise our children? What new ways of thinking and acting will be required of us as denizens of the twenty-first century? Who better to teach us how to avoid compulsive overconsumption than those most vulnerable to it: those struggling with addiction. Shunned for millennia across cultures as reprobates, parasites, pariahs, and purveyors of moral turpitude, people with addiction have evolved a wisdom perfectly suited to the age we live in now.What follows are lessons of recovery for a reward-weary world.