===== PAGE 1 =====

===== PAGE 2 =====

Chapter II

Rules-for the Observation of
Social Facts

The first and most basic rule is,to consider.social facts as things.

I

At the moment when a new order of phenomena becomes the
object of a science they are already represented in the mind, not
only through sense perceptions, but also by some kind of crudely
formed concepts. Before the first rudiments of physics and chemistry were known, men already possessed notions about physical and
chemical phenomena which went beyond pure perception alone.
Such, for example, are those to be found intermingled with all
religions. This is because reflective thought precedes science,
which merely employs it more methodically. Man cannot live
among things without forming ideas about them according to
which he regulates his behaviour. But, because these notions are

closer to us and more within our mental grasp than the realities to;

which they correspond, we naturally tend to substitute them for
the realities, concentrating our speculations upon them. Instead of
observing, describing and comparing things, we are content to
reflect upon our ideas, analysing and combining them. Instead of a
science which deals with realities, we carry out no more than an
ideological analysis. Certainly this analysis does not rule out all
observation. We can appeal to the facts to corroborate these
notions or the conclusions drawn from them. But then the facts
intervene only secondarily, as examples or confirmatory proof.
Thus they are not the subject matter of the science, which

therefore proceeds from ideas to things, and not from things to 4

ideas.

60

of |
nat
of z
sam
fror
it is
hen
tot
nam
to tl
disc
ones

+ Rules for the Observation of Social Facts 61

It is clear that this method cannot yield objective results. These
ations or concepts — however they are designated — are of course
Mt legitimate surrogates for things. The products of common
perience, their main purpose is to attune our actions to the
rrounding world; they are formed by and for experience. Now a
presentation can effectively perform this function even if it is
eoretically false. Several centuries ago Copernicus dispelled the
usions our senses experienced concerning the movements of the
avenly bodies, and yet it is still according to these illusions that
- commonly regulate the distribution of our time. For an idea to
mulate the reaction that the nature of a thing demands, it need
t faithfully express that nature. It is sufficient for it to make us
rceive what is useful or disadvantageous about the thing, and in
at ways it can render us service or disservice. But notions
med in this way can only present a roughly appropriate
cticality, and then only in the general run of cases. How often
; they both dangerous and inadequate! It is therefore not by
borating upon them, however one treats them, that we will ever
ceed in discovering the laws of reality. On the contrary, they
as a veil interposed between the things and ourselves, concealthem from us even more effectively because we believe to be
re transparent.
uch a science can only be a stunted one, for it lacks the subject
tter on which to feed. It has hardly come into existence, one
ht say, before it vanishes, transmuted into an art. Allegedly its
ions contain all that is essential to reality, but this is because
y are confused with the reality itself. From then onwards they
ear to contain all that is needful for us not only to understand
it is, but also to prescribe what should be done and the means
implementation, for what is good is in conformity with the
ire of things. What goes against nature is bad, and the means
ittaining the good and eluding the bad both derive from that
€ nature. Thus if we have already comprehended the reality
n the first, to study it has no longer any practical interest. Since
; this interest which is the reason for our study, there is
ceforth no purpose to it. Our reflective thought is thus induced
im away from what is the true subject matter of the science,
ely the present and the past, and in one fell swoop to proceed
1¢ future. Instead of seeking to understand the facts already
overed and acquired, it immediately undertakes to reveal new
, More in accord with the ends that men pursue. If men think

===== PAGE 3 =====

62 The Rules of Sociological Method

they know what is the essence of matter, they immediately embark which
on the quest for the philosopher’s stone. This encroachment of art subje
upon science, which hinders the latter’s development, is made easy The

also by the very circumstances which determine the awakening of since
scientific reflection. For, since this reflection comes into being sides,
only to satisfy vital needs, it is quite naturally directed towards 3 feel tl
practical matters. The needs which it is called upon to assuage are close |
always pressing ones, and consequently urge it to arrive at 4 is clin
conclusions. Remedies, not explanations, are required. 4] half u

This procedure is so much in accordance with the natural &

have s
inclination of our mind that it is even to be found in the beginnings & artific
of the physical sciences. It is what characterises alchemy as distinct 4 specia
from chemistry, and astrology from astronomy. It is how Bacon in aro
characterises the method followed by the scholars of his day — one existe:
which he fought against. Indeed the notions just discussed are which
those notiones vulgares, or praenotiones,' which he points out as of life
being at the basis of all the sciences,” in which they take the place : questi
of facts.? It is these idola which, resembling ghost-like creatures, only a
distort the true appearance of things, but which we nevertheless experi
mistake for the things themselves. It is because this imagined author
world offers no resistance that the mind, feeling completely We fee
unchecked, gives rein to limitless ambitions, believing it possible and w
to construct — or rather reconstruct — the world through its own agains
power and according to its wishes. true so

If this has been true for the natural sciences, how much more 4 { And
had it to be true for sociology. Men did not wait on the comingof 4

exclusi
social science to have ideas about law, morality, the family, the : proclai
state or society itself, for such ideas were indispensable to their natura
lives. It is above all in sociology that these preconceptions, to a things,
employ again Bacon’s expression, are capable of holding sway 4 behind
over the mind, substituting themselves for things. Indeed, social princip
things are only realised by men: they are the product of human “38 which
activity. Thus they appear to be nothing save the operationalising z constit
of ideas, which may or may not be innate but which we carry = progre:
within us, and their application to the various circumstances the co:
surrounding men’s relationships with one another. The organisa- ever-gr
tion of the family, of contracts, or repression, of the state, and of which |
society seems therefore to be a simple development of the ideas we Yet, e
have about society, the state, justice, etc. Consequently these and establis

similar facts seem to lack any reality save in and through the ideas

sa Ss«evolutic

Rules for the Observation of Social Facts 63
' engender them and which, from then on, become the
ct matter proper of sociology.
> apparent justification for this view derives from the fact that
the details of social life swamp the consciousness from all
it has not a sufficiently strong perception of the details to
1¢ reality behind them. Lacking ties that are firm enough or
enough to us, this all produces the impression upon us that it
ging to nothing and floating in a vacuum, consisting of matter
nreal and infinitely malleable. This is why so many thinkers
een in the social organisation mere combinations which are
ial and to some degree arbitrary. But if the details and the
I concrete forms elude us, at least we represent to ourselves
ugh, approximate way the most general aspects of collective
ice. It is precisely these schematic, summary representations
constitute the prenotions that we employ in our normal way
. Thus we cannot visualise their existence being called into
on, since we see it at the same time as we see our own. Not
re they within us, but since they are the product of repeated
ences, they are invested with a kind of ascendancy and '
ity, by dint of repetition and the habit which results from it.
‘I their resistance when we seek to free ourselves from them,
© cannot fail to regard as real something which pits itself
tus. Thus everything conspires to make us see in them the
cial reality.
indeed up to now sociology has dealt more or less
vely not with things, but with concepts. It is true that Comte
med that social phenomena are natural facts, subject to
| laws. In so doing he implicitly recognised their character as
for in nature there are only things. Yet when, leaving
these general philosophical statements, he tries to apply his
le and deduce from it the science it contained, it is ideas
he too takes as the object of his study. Indeed, what
utes the principal subject matter of his sociology is the
3s Over time of humanity. His starting point is the idea that
ntinuous evolution of the human species consists of “in
owing perfection of human nature. The problem with
1¢ deals is how to discover the sequence of this evolution.
en supposing this evolution exists, its reality can only be
hed when the science has been worked out. Thus the
on cannot be made the subject of research unless it is

===== PAGE 4 =====

64 The Rules of Sociological Method

postulated as a conception of the mind, and not a thing. In fact, so
much is this a wholly subjective idea, this progress of humanity
does not exist. What do exist, and what alone are presented to us
for observation, are particular societies which are born, develop
and die independently of one another. If indeed the most recent

societies were’a continuation of those which had preceded them,

each superior type might be considered merely as the repetition of
the type at the level immediately below it, with some addition,

They could all then be placed end-on, so to speak, assimilating

together all those at the same stage of development; the series thus

formed might be considered Tepresentative of humanity. But thes
facts-do.not-present themselves with such extreme simplicity. A

people which takes the placé of another is not merely a prolonga-

tion of the latter with some new features added. It is different,

gaining some extra properties, but having lost others. It.cgnstitutes

a new individuality, and all such distinct individualities, being

heterogeneous, cannot be absorbed into the same continuous

series, and above all not into one single serié$¥ The succession of :
societies cannot be represented by a geometrical line; on the

contrary, it resembles a tree whose branches grow in divergent,
directions. Briefly, in his consideration of historical development,

Comte has taken his own notion of it, which is one that does not

differ greatly from that commonly held. It is true that, viewed

from a distance, history does take on somewhat neatly this simple

aspect of a series. One perceives only a succession of individuals

all moving in the same direction, because they have the same

human nature. Moreover, since it is inconceivable that social

evolution can be anything other than the development of some

human idea, it appears entirely natural to define it by the

conception that men have of it. But if one proceeds down this path

one not only remains in the realm of ideology, but assigns to

sociology as its object a concept which has nothing peculiarly

sociological about it.

Spencer discards this concept, but replaces it with another which
is none the less formed in the same way. He makes societies, and
not humanity, the object of his study, but immediately gives to
societies a definition which causes the thing of which he speaks to
disappear and puts in its place the preconception he has of them.
In fact he states as a self-evident Proposition that ‘a society is
formed only when, besides juxtaposition, there is co-operation’: it

+ Rules for the Observation of Social Facts 65
dlely in this way that the union of individuals becomes a society
per.* Then, starting from this principle, that co-operation is the
nce of social. life, he divides societies into two classes according
he nature of the predominant mode of co-operation. ‘There is’,
states, ‘a spontaneous co-operation which grows up without
ight during the pursuit of private ends; and there is a coration which, consciously devised, implies distinct recognition
ublic ends’,> The first category he dubs industrial societies, the
t military societies. One may say of this distinction that it is
seminal idea for his sociology.
ut.this initial definition enunciates as a thing what is only a

akwewpaint: It is presented as the expression of a fact that is
ediately apparent, one sufficiently ascertained by observation,
> it is formulated from the very beginning of the science as an
m. Yet from mere inspection it is impossible to know whether
peration really is the mainspring of social life. Such an
‘tion is only scientifically justified if at first all the manifesta-
| Of collective life have been reviewed and it has been
onstrated that they are all various forms of co-operation. Fhus
again a certain conception of social reality is substituted for
Bit | hat is defined. in this way is not society but
cer’s idea of it. If he feels no scruples in proceeding in this
on it is because for him also society is only, and can be only,
2alisation of an idea, namely that very idea of co-operation by
1 he defines society.’ It would be easy to show, in each of the
ular problems that he tackles, that his method remains the
. Also, although he has an air of proceeding empirically,
ise the facts accumulated in his sociology are used to illustrate
ses of notions rather than to describe and explain things, they
indeed to be there to serve as arguments. All that is really
tial in his doctrine can be directly deduced from his definition
‘iety and the different forms of Co-operation. For if we have
he choice between co-operation tyranically imposed and one
s free and spontaneous, it is plainly the latter which is the
lowards which humanity does and ought to strive.
sé Common notions are not to be encountered only at the
of the sciences, but are also to be found constantly as the
ents unravel. In our present state of knowledge we do not
exactly what the state is, nor sovereignty, political freedom,
racy, socialism, communism, etc. Thus our method should

rr

===== PAGE 5 =====

66 The Rules of Sociological Method

make us forswear any use of these concepts so long as they have
not been scientifically worked out. Yet the words that express
them recur continually in the discussions of sociologists. They are
commonly used with assurance, as if they corresponded to things
well known and well defined, while in fact they evoke in us only
confused fiotions, an amalgam of vague impressions, prejudices
and passions. Today we mock at the strange ratiocinations that the
doctors of the Middle Ages constructed from their notions of heat
and cold, humidity and dryness, etc. Yet we do not perceive that
we continue to apply the selfsame method to an order of phenomena which is even less appropriate for it than any other, on
account of its extreme complexity.

In the specialised branches of sociology this ideological character is even more marked.

It is particularly so in the case of ethics. It may in fact be
asserted that there is not a single system which does not represent
it as the simple development of an initial idea which enshrines it

potentially in its entirety. Some believe that men possess this idea -

‘complete-at-birth; on the other hand, others believe that it has

~ grown up at a varying rate in the course of history. But for both

empiricists and rationalists this is all that is truly real about
morality. As for detailed legal and moral rules, these would have,
in a manner of speaking, no existence per se, being merely
applications of the basic notion to the particular circumstances of
living, and varying according to different cases. Hence the subject
matter of morality cannot be this unreal system of precepts, but
the idea from which the precepts derive and which is interpreted
differently according to cases. Thus all the questions that ethics
normally raises relate not to things but to ideas. We must know
what constitutes the ideas of law and morality and not what is the
nature of morality and law considered in their own right. Moralists
have not yet even grasped the simple truth that, just as our
representations of things perceived by the senses spring from those
things themselves and express them more or less accurately, our
representation of morality springs from observing the rules that
function before our very eyes and perceives them systematically.
Consequently it is these rules and not the cursory view we have of
them which: constitute the subject matter of sciénce, just as the
subject matter of physics consists of actual physical bodies and not
the idea that ordinary people have of it. The outcome is that the

tio

+ Rules for the Observation of Social Facts 67

asis of morality is taken to be what is only its superstructure,
amely, the way in which it extends itself to the individual
onsciousness and makes its impact upon it. Nor is it only for the
lore general problems of science that this method is followed; it is
ot modified even for more specialised questions. From the
sential ideas that he studies at the outset the moralist passes on
) the examination of second-order ideas, such as family, country,
sponsibility, charity and justice — but it is always to ideas that his
inking is applied.
The same applies to- political economy. John Stuart Mill states
at its subject matter is the social facts which arise principally or
‘clusively with a view to the acquisition of wealth. But, in order
i the facts defined in this way to be submitted to the scrutiny of
€ scientist as things, at the very least it should be possible to
dicate the means whereby those which satisfy this condition can
 recognised.:With a new science one is no position to affirm.that
e facts exist, and even less to know what they are. In any kind of
vestigation it is only when the explanation of the facts is fairly
Il advanced that it is possible to establish that they have a goal
d what that goal is. There is no problem more complex or less
ely to be resolved at the very beginning. We therefore lack any
ior assurance that a sphere of social activity exists where the
sire for wealth really plays this predominant role. Consequently
> subject matter of economics so conceived is made up not of
alities which may be precisely pointed to, but merely of possible
es, pure conceptions of the mind. They are facts which the
onomist conceives of as relating to the purpose under consideran, and facts as he conceives them. If, for example, he embarks
a study of what he terms production, he believes it possible
mediately to spell out and review the principal agencies which
ist it. This means therefore that he has not ascertained their
stence by studying on what conditions depends the thing that he
studying. If he had, he would have begun by setting out the
erations from which he drew that conclusion. If, in summary
ms, at the beginning of his researches he proceeds to make such
lassification, it is because he has arrived at it by mere logical
lysis. He starts from the idea of production and as he dissects it
finds that it logically entails ideas of natural forces, of work, of
ls or capital and he then goes on to treat in the same way these
as which he has derived.?

===== PAGE 6 =====

68 The Rules of Sociological Method

The most basic economic theory of all, that of value, has clearly v
been built up according to the same method. If value were studied h
as a fact having reality should be, the economist would show how a
the thing so designated could be identified; he would then classify sl!
its various kinds, testing by methodical inductions how these vary d
according fo different causes, and finally comparing the various th
Tesults in order to arrive at a general formulation. A theory could tr
therefore only emérge when the science was fairly well advanced. by
Instead it is met with at the very beginning. To do this the we

" economist contents himself with his own reflective thinking,

" evoking his idea of value, namely that of an object capable of th
being exchanged. He finds that this implies the ideas of utility and m
scarcity, etc., and it is from these fruits of his analysis that he Th
constructs his definition. He doubtless backs it up with a few me
examples. But, reflecting on the countless facts which such a to
theory must explain, how can one concede the slightest validity of by
proof to the necessarily very few facts which are cited at random as exi
they suggest themselves to him? wis

Mpassinwpolitical.economyrrassinethicspthe-rotéaahe pla

sanyestigation. is.extremely limited; and-that ofgghigprepon erahty righ
‘The theoretical part of ethics is reduced to.a few discussions on the. ; wel
ideas of duty, goodness and right. But such abstract speculations case
do not strictly speaking constitute a science, since their purpose is Y
not to determine what is, in fact, supreme moral law, but what To
ought to be. Likewise, what economists dwell on most in their abo
researches is the problem of knowing, for example, whether phe:
society should be organised on individualistic or socialist lines; are |
whether it is better for the state to intervene in industrial and - that
commercial relations or abandon them entirely to private initia- obse
tive; whether the monetary system should be based on monomet- »* and
allism or bimetallism, etc. Laws properly so called are very few; nom
even those which by custom we call laws do not generally merit casa Ott
the term, but are merely maxims for action, or in reality practical ; able;
precepts. For example, the celebrated law of supply and demand. . “trans
has never been established inductively as an expression of econo- ideal
mic reality. Never has any experiment or methodical comparison: dtisr
been instituted to establish whether, in fact, it is according to this Orgar
law that economic relations are regulated. All that could be done; of cer
and has been done, has been to demonstrate by dialectical, notio;

argument that individuals should act in this way if they perceive:

- 7 Rules for the Observation of Social Facts 69

/hat is in their best interest; an
armful to them, and if they fo!
n error of logic. It is logical t
10uld be the most prized, and
emand and most scarce should

Yy other course of action would be
lowed it would indeed constitute
hat the most productive industries
that those who hold goods most in
sell them at the highest price. But

uld be good for them to be linked.
What we state about this |
© orthodox school of ec

usible extent as a clear expression of reality, it is because,
tly or wrongly, the assumption has been that these counsels

€ effectively those followed by most men and in the majority of
28.

igs is to treat them as data,
this constitutes the Starting point for Fares ee Social phe-
“Na unquestionably display this characteristic. What is given is
he idea.that men conceive of value i i

ee

===== PAGE 7 =====

70 The Rules of Sociological Method

2xpressthem, We do not know a priori what ideas give rise to the
various currents into which social life divides, nor whether they
exist.,It is only after we have traced the currents back to their
source that we will know from where they spring.

Social phengmena must therefore be considered in themselves,
detached from the conscious beings who form their own mental
representations of them: They must be studied from the outside,
as external things, because it is in this guise that they present
themselves to us. If this quality of externality proves to be only
apparent, the illusion will be dissipated as the science progresses
and we will see, so to speak, the external merge with the internal.
But the outcome cannot be anticipated, and even if in the end
social phenomena may not have all the features intrinsic to things,
they must at first be dealt with as if they had. This rule is therefore
applicable to the whole of social reality and there is no reason for
any exceptions to be made. Even those phenomena which give the
greatest appearance of being artificial in their arrangement should
be considered from this viewpoint. The conventional character of a
practice or an institution should never be assumed in advance. If,
moreover, we are allowed to invoke personal experience, we
believe we can state with confidence that by following this
procedure one will often have the satisfaction of seeing the
apparently most arbitrary facts, after more attentive observation,
display features of constancy and regularity symptomatic of their
objectivity.

In general, moreover, what has been previously stated about the
distinctive features of the social fact gives us sufficient reassurance
about the nature of this objectivity to demonstrate that it is not
illusory. A thing is principally recognisable by virtue of not being
capable of modification through a mere act of the will. This is not
because it is intractable to all modification. But to effect change
the will is not sufficient; it needs a degree of arduous effort
because of the strength of the resistance it offers, which even then
cannot always be overcome. We have seen that social facts possess
this property of resistance. Far from their being a product of our
will, they determine it from without. They are like moulds into
which we are forced to cast our actions. The necessity is often
ineluctable. But even when we succeed in triumphing, the opposition we have encountered suffices to alert us that we are faced with
something independent of ourselves. Thus in considering facts as

realis
accor
stage

sociol
states
separ
treate
is an
proce
succe:
hand,
chara
event:

+ Rules for the Observation of Social Facts 7

88 we shall be merely conforming to their nature. .
1 the end, the reform that must be introduced into sociology is
tical in every respect to that which has transformed psycholover the last thirty years. Just as Comte and Spencer declare
social facts are facts of nature, but nevertheless refuse to treat
n as things, the different empirical schools had long recognised
natural character of psychological phenomena, while coning to apply to them a purely ideological method. Indeed the
iricists, no less than their Opponents, proceeded exclusively by
spection. But the facts observable in ourselves are too few,
fleeting and malleable, to be able to impose themselves upon
corresponding notions that habit has rooted in us and to
ail over them. Thus when these notions are not subject to
> other control, no countervailing force exists; consequently
take the place of facts and constitute the subject matter of the
ce. Thus neither Locke nor Condillac considered physical
iomena objectively. It is not sensation they study, but a
in idea of it. This is why, although in certain respects they
its forerunners, scientific psychology arose only much later.
ose after it had been finally established that states of conSness can and must be studied externally and not from the
ective of the individual consciousness which experiences
. This is the great revolution that has been accomplished in
ield of study. Ail the special procedures and new methods
1 have enriched this science are only various expedients for
ing more fully this basic idea. Such an advance remains to be
nplished in sociology, which must pass from the subjective
, beyond which it has hardly progressed, to the objective

is transition, moreover, is less difficult to accomplish in
logy than in psychology. Psychical facts naturally appertain to
of the individual, from whom they do not even appear to be
able. Internal by definition, such states cannot seemingly be
d as external save by doing violence to their nature. Not only

effort of abstraction necessary, but a whole gamut of
dures and artifices as well, for them to be considered
ssfully from the external viewpoint. Social facts, on the other

display much more naturally and immediately all the
teristics of a thing. Law is enshrined in legal codes, the
s of daily life are registered in statistical figures and historical

===== PAGE 8 =====

72 The Rules of Sociological Method

monuments, fashions are preserved in dress, taste in works of art. ae th
By their very nature social facts tend to form outside the con- re
sciousnesses of individuals, since they dominate them. To perceive hi
them in their capacity as things it is therefore not necessary to ne

engage in an ingenious distortion. From this viewpoint sociology fa
has significdnt advantages over psychology which have hitherto

ae €
not been perceived, and this should accelerate its development. Its a
facts are perhaps more difficult to interpret because they are more % j sO
complex, but they are more readily accessible. Psychology, onthe “@ q fu
~ other hand, has not only difficulty in specifying its facts, but also in th
‘comprehending them. Thus one may legitimately believe that as
soon as this principle of sociological method has been universally in
acknowledged and is put into practice, sociology will be seen to ou
Progress at a speed that its present slow rate of development would fer

scarcely allow one to suppose, even making up the lead of 4 j Co
psychology, which it owes solely to its prior historical place!” E

wh

ab

tak

I op:
pre

But our predecessors’ experience has shown us that, in order to j dig
realise in practice the truth just established, it is not enough to ad
demonstrate it theoretically or even to absorb it oneself. The mind i strc
has such a natural disposition to fail to Tecognise it that inevitably 4 diff
we will relapse into past errors unless we submit ourselves to a Th
rigorous discipline. Wesshall.formulate 1 -principal.rules.for this tole
Miscipline,.alhofwhich-are:corollazies. off previous Tule. j as
(2) The-first.of these corollaries-is:. One must.systematically. discard : rep
All preconceptions. Special proof of this rule is unnecessary: it stuc
follows from all that we have stated above. Moreover, it is the sen
basis of all scientific method. Descartes’ method of doubt is in see!
essence only an application of it. If at the very moment of the adn
foundation of science Descartes prescribed a rule for himself to beli
question all the ideas he had previously accepted, it is because he 24 con:
wished to use only concepts which had been scientifically worked an
out, that is, constructed according to the method that he devised. app:
All those of another origin had therefore to be rejected, at least con:
for the time being. We have seen that Bacon’s theory of the idols ' whic
has the same significance. The two great doctrines, so often placed . whic

in contradiction to each other, agree on this essential point. Thus psah

+ Rules for the Observation Of Social Facts 73
€ sociologist, either when he decides upon the object of his
search or in the course of his investigations, must resolutely deny
mself the use of those concepts formed outside science and for
eds entirely unscientific. He must free himself from those
llacious notions which hold Sway over the mind of the ordinary
Tson, shaking off, once and for all, the yoke of those empirical
tegories that long habit often makes tyrannical. If necessity
metimes forces him to resort to them, let him at least do so in
ll cognisance of the little value they possess, so as not to assign to
em in the investigation a role which they are unfit to play.

What makes emancipation from such notions peculiarly difficult
sociology is that sentiment so often intervenes. We enthuse over
r political and religious beliefs and moral practices very difently from the way we do over the objects of the physical world.
nsequently this emotional quality is transmitted to the way in
ich we conceive and explain our beliefs. The ideas that we form
out them are deeply felt, just as are their purposes, thereby
‘ing on such authority that they brook no contradiction. Any
inion which is embarrassing is treated as hostile. For example, a
position may not accord with our view of patriotism or personal
nity. It is therefore denied, whatever may be the proofs
anced. We cannot allow it to be true. It is rejected, and our
ng emotions, seeking a justification for so doing, have no
iculty in suggesting reasons which we find readily conclusive.
se notions may even be so prestigious that they will not
rate scientific examination. The mere fact of subjecting them,
well as the phenomena they express, to cold, dry analysis is
ugnant to certain minds. The sociologist who undertakes to
ly morality objectively as an external reality seems to such
sitive souls bereft of moral sense, just as the vivisectionist
ns to the ordinary person devoid of normal feelings. Far from
litting that these sentiments are subject to science, it is
eved that it is to them one should address onself in order to
struct the science of things to which they relate. ‘Woe’, writes
eloquent historian of religions, ‘Woe to the scientist who
roaches the things of God’ without having in the depths of his
‘ciousness, in the innermost indestructible parts of his being, in
h sleep the souls of his ancestors, an unknown Sanctuary from
h at times there arises the fragrance of incense, a verse of a
m, a cry of sorrow or triumph that as a child, following his
