# Тема: Experimentality, Technology, and the Scientific Method
# Источник: Фейерабенд Против метода
# Содержание: Материал курса. Подробнее — в README папки или по названию файла.


Aegedai #t st
Method
LC) al
| ci
PAUL FEYERABEND


Preface vii
Preface to the Third Edition ix
Introduction to the Chinese Edition 1
Analytical Index 5
Introduction 9
Parts 1-20 14
Postscript on Relativism 268
Index 273


Preface

In 1970 Imre Lakatos, one of the best friends I ever had, cornered me
ata party. ЛPaul,С he said, Лyou have such strange ideas. Why donСt you
write them down? I shall write a reply, we publish the whole thing and
I promise you — we shall have lots of fun.С I liked the suggestion and
started working. The manuscript of my part of the book was finished
in 1972 and I sent it to London. There it disappeared under rather
mysterious circumstances. Imre Lakatos, who loved dramatic
gestures, notified Interpol and, indeed, Interpol found my manuscript and returned it to me. I reread it and made some final changes.
In February 1974, only a few weeks after I had finished my revision, I
was informed of ImreСs death. I published my part of our common
enterprise without his response. A year later I published a second
volume, Science in a Free Society, containing additional material and
replies to criticism.

This history explains the form of the book. It is not a systematic
treatise; it is a letter to a friend and addresses his idiosyncrasies. For
example, Imre Lakatos was a rationalist, hence rationalism plays a
large role in the book. He also admired Popper and therefore Popper
occurs much more frequently than his Лobjective importanceС would
warrant. Imre Lakatos, somewhat jokingly, called me an anarchist
and I had no objection to putting on the anarchistСs mask. Finally,
Imre Lakatos loved to embarrass serious opponents with jokes and
irony and so I, too, occasionally wrote in a rather ironical vein. An
example is the end of Chapter |: Лanything goesС is not a ЛprincipleС I
hold — I do not think that ЛprinciplesС can be used and fruitfully
discussed outside the concrete research situation they are supposed
to affect — but the terrified exclamation of a rationalist who takes a
closer look at history. Reading the many thorough, serious,
longwinded and thoroughly misguided criticisms I received after
publication of the first English edition I often recalled my exchanges
with Imre; how we would both have laughed had we been able to read
these effusions together.

The new edition merges parts of Against Method with excerpts from
Science in a Free Society. | have omitted material no longer of interest,


vit PREFACE

added a chapter on the trial of Galileo and a chapter on the notion of
reality that seems to be required by the fact that knowledge is part of a
complex historical process, eliminated mistakes, shortened the
argument wherever possible and freed it from some of its earlier
idiosyncrasies. Again I want to make two points: first, that science can
stand on its own feet and does not need any help from rationalists,
secular humanists, Marxists and similar religious movements; and,
secondly, that non-scientific cultures, procedures and assumptions
can also stand on their own feet and should be allowed to do so, if this
is the wish of their representatives. Science must be protected from
ideologies; and societies, especially democratic societies, must be
protected from science. This does not mean that scientists cannot
profit from a philosophical education and that humanity has not and
never will profit from the sciences. However, the profits should not
be imposed; they should be examined and freely accepted by the
parties of the exchange. In a democracy scientific institutions,
research programmes, and suggestions must therefore be subjected
to public control, there must be a separation of state and science just
as there is a separation between state and religious institutions, and
science should be taught as one view among many and not as the one
and only road to truth and reality. There is nothing in the nature of
science that excludes such institutional arrangements or shows that
they are liable to lead to disaster.

None of the ideas that underlie my argument is new. My
interpretation of scientific knowledge, for example, was a triviality for
physicists like Mach, Boltzmann, Einstein and Bohr. But the ideas of
these great thinkers were distorted beyond recognition by the rodents
of neopositivism and the competing rodents of the church of ЛcriticalС
rationalism. Lakatos was, after Kuhn, one of the few thinkers who
noticed the discrepancy and tried to eliminate it by means of a
complex and very interesting theory of rationality. I donСt think he has
succeeded in this. But the attempt was worth the effort; it has led to
interesting results in the history of science and to new insights into
the limits of reason. I therefore dedicate also this second, already
much more lonely version of our common work to his memory.

Earlier material relating to the problems in this book is now
collected in my Philosophical Papers.' Farewell to ReasonС contains
historical material, especially from the early history of rationalism in
the West and applications to the problems of today.

Berkeley, September 1987

1. 2 vols, Cambridge, 1981.

2. London, 1987.


Preface to the Third Edition
Many things have happened since I first published Against Method
(AM for short). There have been dramatic political, social and
ecological changes. Freedom has increased — but it has brought
hunger, insecurity, nationalistic tensions, wars and straightforward
murder. World leaders have met to deal with the deterioration of our
resources; as is their habit, they have made speeches and signed
agreements. The agreements are far from satisfactory; some of them
are a sham. However, at least verbally, the environment has become a
world-wide concern. Physicians, developmental agents, priests
working with the poor and disadvantaged have realized that these
people know more about their condition than a belief in the universal
excellence of science or organized religion had assumed and they
have changed their actions and their ideas accordingly (liberation
theology; primary environmental care, etc.). Many intellectuals have
adapted what they have learned at universities and special schools to
make their knowledge more efficient and more humane.

On a more academic level historians (of science, of culture) have
started approaching the past in its own terms. Already in 1933, in his
inaugural lecture at the Collége de France, Lucien Febvre had
ridiculed writers who, Лsitting at their desks, behind mountains of
paper, having closed and covered their windowsС, made profound
judgements about the life of landholders, peasants and farmhands. In
a narrow field historians of science tried to reconstruct the distant
and the more immediate past without distorting it by modern beliefs
about truth (fact) and rationality. Philosophers then concluded that
the various forms of rationalism that had offered their services had
not only produced chimaeras but would have damaged the sciences
had they been adopted as guides. Here KuhnСs masterpiece played a
decisive role.' It led to new ideas. Unfortunately it also encouraged
lots of trash. KuhnСs main terms (ЛparadigmС, ЛrevolutionС, Лnormal
—___

1. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago, 1962.


x PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

scienceС, ЛprescienceС, ЛanomalyС, Лpuzzle-solvingС, etc.) turned up in
various forms of pseudoscience while his general approach confused
many writers: finding that science had been freed from the fetters of a
dogmatic logic and epistemology they tried to tie it down again, this
time with sociological ropes. That trend lasted well into the early
Лseventies. By contrast there are now historians and sociologists who
concentrate on particulars and allow generalities only to the extent
that they are supported by sociohistorical connections. ЛNatureС, says
Bruno Latour, referring to Лscience in the makingС is Лthe
consequence of [a] settlementС of ЛcontroversiesС.? Or, as I wrote in
the first edition of AM: ЛCreation of a thing, and creation plus full
understanding of a correct idea of the thing, are very often parts of one
and the same indivisible process and cannot be separated without
bringing the process to a stop.Ф?

Examples of the new approach are Andrew Pickering, Constructing
Quarks, Peter Galison, How Experiments End, Martin Rudwick, The
Great Devonian Controversy, Arthur Fine, The Shaky Game and
others. There are studies of the various traditions (religious,
stylistic, patronage, etc.) that influenced scientists and shaped their
research;Ф they show the need for a far more complex account of
scientific knowledge than that which had emerged from positivism
and similar philosophies. On a more general level we have the older
work of Michal Polanyi and then Putnam, van Fraassen, Cartwright,
Marcello Pera® and, yes, Imre Lakatos, who was sufficiently
optimistic to believe that history herself —a lady he took very seriously
— offered simple rules of theory evaluation.

In sociology the attention to detail has led to a situation where the
problem is no longer why and how ЛscienceС changes but how it keeps
together. Philosophers, philosophers of biology especially, suspected
for some time that there is not one entity ЛscienceС with clearly
defined principles but that science contains a great variety of (highlevel theoretical, phenomenological, experimental) approaches and
that even a particular science such as physics is but a scattered
collection of subjects (elasticity, hydrodynamics, rheology, thermodynamics, etc., etc.) each one containing contrary tendencies
(example: Prandtl vs Helmholtz, Kelvin, Lamb, Rayleigh; Truesdell

2. Science in Action, Milton Keynes, 1987, pp. 4 and 98f.

3. London, 1975, p. 26, repeated on p. 17 of the present edition — original
emphasis.

4. All Chicago University Press.

5. An example is Mario Biagioli, Galileo Courtier, forthcoming.

6. Science and Rhetoric, forthcoming.


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION xt
vs Prandtl; Birkhoff vs Лphysical commonsenseС; Kinsman illustrating
all trends — in hydrodynamics). For some authors this is not only a
fact; it is also desirable.С Here again I contributed, in a small way, in
Chapters 3, 4 and 11 of AM,® in section 6 of my contribution to
Lakatos and MusgraveСs Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge
(criticism of the uniformity of paradigms in Kuhn)? and already in
1962, in my contribution to the Delaware Studies for the Philosophy of
Science.'°

Unity further disappears when we pay attention not only to breaks
on the theoretical level, but to experiment and, especially, to modern
laboratory science. As Ian Hacking has shown in his pathbreaking
essay Representing and InterveningФ and as emerges from PickeringСs
Science as Practice and Culture,'* terms such as ЛexperimentС and
ЛobservationС cover complex processes containing many strands.
ЛFactsС come from negotiations between different parties and the
final product — the published report — is influenced by physical
events, dataprocessors, compromises, exhaustion, lack of money,
national pride and so on. Some microstudies of laboratory science
resemble the ЛNew JournalismС of Jimmy Breslin, Guy Talese, Tom
Wolfe and others; researchers no longer sit back and read the papers
in a certain field; they are not content with silent visits to laboratories
either—they walk right in, engage scientists in conversation and make
things happen (Kuhn and his collaborators started the procedure in
their interviews for the history of quantum mechanics). At any rate —
we are a long way from the old (Platonic) idea of science as a system of
statements growing with experiment and observation and kept in
order by lasting rational standards.

AM is still partly proposition oriented; however, I also had my
sane moments. My discussion of incommensurability, for example,
does not Лreduce the difference to one of theoryС as Pickering
writes.'? It includes art forms, perceptions (a large part of Chapter
16 is about the transition from Greek geometric art and poetry to the
classical period), stages of child development and asserts Лthat the
views of scientists and especially their views on basic matters are
often as different from each other as are the ideologies of different

7. J. Dupré, ЛThe Disunity of ScienceС, Mind, 92, 1983.

8. Present edition. Taken over unamended from first edition.

9. 1. Lakaros and A. Musgrave (eds), Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge,
Cambridge, 1965.

10. ЛHow to be a Good EmpiricistС, Delaware Studies, Vol. 2, 1963.

11. Cambridge, 1983.

12. A. Pickering (ed.), Science as Practice and Culture, Chicago, 1992.

13. ibid.,p. 10.


xt PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

culturesС.'* In this connection I examined the practical aspects of
logic, the way, that is, in which ideas are related to each other in
ongoing research rather than in the finished products (if there ever
are such products). My discussion of the many events that constitute
what is being observed!> and especially my discussion of GalileoСs
telescopic discoveries'® agree with the requirements of the new
laboratory sociology except that GalileoСs ЛlaboratoryС was rather
small by comparison. This case shows, incidentally, that like the
older philosophies of science the new microsociology is not a
universal account but a description of prominent aspects of a special
period. It does not matter. A universal description of science at any
rate can at most offer a list of events.'Ф It was different in antiquity.

It is clear that the new situation requires a new philosophy and,
above all, new terms. Yet some of the foremost researchers in the
area are still asking themselves whether a particular piece of research
produces a ЛdiscoveryС, or an inventionС, or to what extent a
(temporary) result is ЛobjectiveС. The problem arose in quantum
mechanics; it is also a problem for classical science. Shall we
continue using outmoded terms to describe novel insight or would it
not be better to start using a new language? And wouldnСt poets and
journalists be of great help in finding such a language?

Secondly, the new situation again raises the question of ЛscienceС
ys democracy. For me this was the most important question. ЛMy
main reason for writing the bookС, I say in the Introduction to the
Chinese Edition,'® Лwas humanitarian, not intellectual. | wanted to
support people, not to “advance knowledge.ФС Now if science is no
longer a unit, if different parts of it proceed in radically different ways
and if connections between these ways are tied to particular research
episodes, then scientific projects have to be taken individually. This
is what government agencies started doing some time ago. In the late
sixties Лthe idea of a comprehensive science policy was gradually
abandoned. It was realized that science was not one but many
enterprises and that there could be no single policy for the support of
all of them.'? Government agencies no longer finance ЛscienceС, they
finance particular projects. But then the word ЛscientificС can no
longer exclude ЛunscientificС projects — we have to look at matters in

14. AM, first edition, p. 274.

15. ibid., pp. 149ff. Reprinted in the present edition.

16. Chapters 8 to 10 of the present edition.

17. Cf. my contribution to the 1992 Erasmus Symposium, ЛHas the Scientific
View of the World a Special Status Compared With Other Views?С, forthcoming.

18, Contained in the present edition,

19. J. Ben-David, Scientific Growth, Berkeley, 1991, p. 525.


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION xt
detail. Are the new philosophers and sociologists prepared to
consider this consequence of their research?

There have been many other changes. Medical researchers and
technologists have not only invented useful instruments (such as
those employing the principles of fibre optics which in many contexts
replace the more dangerous methods of X-ray diagnostic) but have
become more open towards new (or older) ideas. Only twenty years
ago the idea that the mind affects physical well-being, though
supported by experience, was rather unpopular — today it is
mainstream. Malpractice suits have made physicians more careful,
sometimes too careful for the good of their patient, but they have also
forced them to consult alternative opinions. (In Switzerland a
belligerent plurality of views is almost part of culture — and I used it
when arranging public confrontations between hardheaded scientists
and ЛalternativeС thinkers.2°) However, here as elsewhere, simple
philosophies, whether of a dogmatic or a more liberal kind, have their
limits. There are no general solutions. An increased liberalism in the
definition of ЛfactС can have grave repercussions,Ф! while the idea
that truth is concealed and even perverted by the processes that are
meant to establish it makes excellent sense.ФФ (I therefore again warn
the reader that I donСt have the intention of replacing Лold and
dogmaticС principles by Лnew and more libertarian onesС. For
example, I am neither a populist for whom an appeal to Лthe peopleС is
the basis of all knowledge, nor a relativist for whom there are no
Лtruths as suchС but only truths for this or that group and/or
individual. All I say is that non-experts often know more than experts c
and should therefore be consulted and that prophets of truth (including
those who use arguments) more often than not are carried along by a
vision that clashes with the very events the vision is supposed to be
exploring. There exists ample evidence for both parts of this
assertion.

A case I already mentioned is development: professionals dealing
with the ecological, social and medical parts of developmental aid
have by now realized that the imposition of ЛrationalС or ЛscientificС
procedures, though occasionally beneficial (removal of some
Parasites and infectious diseases), can lead to serious material and

20. Cf. the series edited by Christian Thomas and myself and published by the
Verlag der Fachvereine, Zurich, 1983-87.

21. Cf. Peter W. Huber, Galileo's Revenge, New York, 1991.

1 For a fictional account, cf. Tom WolfeСs The Bonfire of the Vanities, New York,


xiv PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
spiritual problems. They did not abandon what they had learned in
their universities, however; they combined this knowledge with local
beliefs and customs and thereby established a much needed link with
the problems of life that surround us everywhere, in the First,
Second, and Third Worlds.
The present edition contains major changes (Chapter 19 and part of
Chapter 16 have been rewritten, the old Chapter 20 has been
omitted), additions (a paragraph here, a paragraph there), stylistic
changes (I hope they are improvements) and corrections as well as
additions in the references. As far as I am concerned the main ideas
of the essay (i.e. the ideas expressed in italics in the Introduction to
the Chinese Edition) are rather trivial and appear trivial when
expressed in suitable terms. I prefer more paradoxical formulations,
however, for nothing dulls the mind as thoroughly as hearing familiar
words and slogans. It is one of the merits of deconstruction to have
undermined philosophical commonplaces and thus to have made
some people think. Unfortunately it affected only a small circle of
insiders and it affected them in ways that are not always clear, not
even to them. ThatСs why I prefer Nestroy, who was a great, popular
and funny deconstructeur, while Derrida, for all his good intentions,
canСt even tell a story.

Rome, July 1992


Introduction

to the Chinese Edition
This book proposes a thesis and draws consequences from it. The
thesis is: the events, procedures and results that constitute the sciences have
no common structure, there are no elements that occur in every
scientific investigation but are missing elsewhere. Concrete developments (such as the overthrow of steady state cosmologies and the
discovery of the structure of DNA) have distinct features and we can
often explain why and how these features led to success. But not
every discovery can be accounted for in the same manner, and
procedures that paid off in the past may create havoc when imposed
on the future. Successful research does not obey general standards; it
relies now on one trick, now on another; the moves that advance it
and the standards that define what counts as an advance are not
always known to the movers. Far-reaching changes of outlook, such
as the so-called ЛCopernican RevolutionС or the ЛDarwinian
RevolutionС, affect different areas of research in different ways and
receive different impulses from them. |A theory of science that
devises standards and structural elements for all scientific activities
and authorizes them by reference to ЛReasonС or ЛRationalityС may
impress outsiders — but it is much too crude an instrument for the
people on the spot, that is, for scientists facing some concrete
research problem.

In this book I try to support the thesis by historical examples. Such
support does not establish it; it makes it plausible and the way in which
it is reached indicates how future statements about Лthe nature of
scienceС may be undermined: given any rule, or any general
statement about the sciences, there always exist developments which
are praised by those who support the rule but which show that the
tule does more damage than good.

One consequence of the thesis is that scientific successes cannot be
explained in a simple way. We cannot say: Лthe structure of the atomic
nucleus was found because people did A, B,C...Ф where A, BandC
are procedures which can be understood independently of their use
in nuclear physics. All we can do is to give a historical account of the
2 AGAINST METHOD
details, including social circumstances, accidents and personal
idiosyncrasies.

Another consequence is that the success of ЛscienceС cannot be used as
an argument for treating as yet unsolved problems in a standardized way.
That could be done only if there are procedures that can be detached
from particular research situations and whose presence guarantees
success. The thesis says that there are no such procedures. Referring
to the success of ЛscienceС in order to justify, say, quantifying human
behaviour is therefore an argument without substance. Quantification works in some cases, fails in others; for example, it ran into
difficulties in one of the apparently most quantitative of all sciences,
celestial mechanics (special region: stability of the planetary system)
and was replaced by qualitative (topological) considerations.

Italso follows that Лnon-scientificС procedures cannot be pushed aside by
argument. To say: Лthe procedure you used is non-scientific, therefore
we cannot trust your results and cannot give you money for researchС
assumes that ЛscienceС is successful and that it is successful because it
uses uniform procedures. The first part of the assertion (Лscience is oO
always successfulС) is not true, if by ЛscienceС we mean things done by
scientists — there are lots of failures also. The second part — that
successes are due to uniform procedures — is not true because there
are no such procedures. Scientists are like architects who build
buildings of different sizes and different shapes and who can be
judged only affer the event, i.e. only after they have finished their (eo)
structure. It may stand up, it may fall down — nobody knows.

But if scientific achievements can be judged only after the event
and if there is no abstract way of ensuring success beforehand, then
there exists no special way of weighing scientific promises either —
scientists are no better off than anybody else in these matters, they
only know more details. This means that the public can participate in the
discussion without disturbing existing roads to success (there are no such
roads). In cases where the scientistsС work affects the public it even
should participate: first, because it is a concerned party (many
scientific decisions affect public life), secondly, because such
participation is the best scientific education the public can get —a full
democratization of science (which includes the protection of
minorities such as scientists) is not in conflict with science. It is in
conflict with a philosophy, often called ЛRationalismС, that uses a
frozen image of science to terrorize people unfamiliar with its
practice.

A consequence to which I allude in Chapter 19 and which is
closely connected with its basic thesis is that there can be many different
kinds of science. People starting from different social backgrounds will


INTRODUCTION TO THE CHINESE EDITION 3
approach the world in different ways and learn different things about
it. People survived millennia before Western science/arose; to do this
they had to know their surroundings up to and including elements of
astronomy. ЛSeveral thousand Cuahuila Indians never exhausted the
natural resources of a desert region in South California, in which
today only a handful of white families manage to subsist. They lived
ina land of plenty, for in this apparently completely barren territory, (e)
they were familiar with no less than sixty kinds of edible plants and
twenty-eight others of narcotic, stimulant or medical propertiesС.
The knowledge that preserves the lifestyles of nomads was acquired
and is preserved in a non-scientific way (ЛscienceС now being modern
natural science). Chinese technology for a long time lacked any
Western-scientific underpinning and yet it was far ahead of
contemporary Western technology.

The remark that without Western science many “Third World
nationsС would be starving is correct but one should add that the
troubles were created, not alleviated by earlier forms of ЛdevelopmentС. It is also true that Western medicine helped eradicate
parasites and some infectious diseases but this does not show that
Western science is the only tradition that has good things to offer and
that other forms of inquiry are without any merit whatsoever.

More on these matters can be found in my book Farewell to
Reason.Ф

My main motive in writing the book was humanitarian, not
intellectual. I wanted to support people, not to Лadvance knowledgeС.
People all over the world have developed ways of surviving in partly
dangerous, partly agreeable surroundings. The stories they told and
the activities they engaged in enriched their lives, protected them and
gave them meaning. The Лprogress of knowledge and civilizationС — as
the process of pushing Western ways and values into all corners of the
globe is being called — destroyed these wonderful products of human
ingenuity and compassion without a single glance in their direction.
ЛProgress of knowledgeС in many places meant killing of minds.
Today old traditions are being revived and people try again to adapt

1. C. Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind, London, 1966, pp. 4f.

2. London, 1987.


4 AGAINST METHOD

their lives to the ideas of their ancestors. I have tried to show, by an
analysis of the apparently hardest parts of science, the natural
sciences, that science, properly understood, has no argument against
such a procedure. There are many scientists who act accordingly.
Physicians, anthropologists and environmentalists are starting to
adapt their procedures to the values of the people they are supposed
to advise. I am not against a science so understood. Such a science is
one of the most wonderful inventions of the human mind. But I am
against ideologies that use the name of science for cultural murder.


Analytical Index

Being a Sketch of the Main Argument
Introduction 9
Science is an essentially anarchic enterprise: theoretical anarchism is more
humanitarian and more likely to encourage progress than its law-and-order
alternatives.
1 14
This is shown both by an examination of historical episodes and by an
abstract analysis of the relation between idea and action. The only principle
that does not inhibit progress is: anything goes.
2 20
For example, we may use hypotheses that contradict well-confirmed theories
and/or well-established experimental results. We may advance science by
proceeding counterinductively.
3 24
The consistency condition which demands that new hypotheses agree with
accepted theories is unreasonable because it preserves the older theory, and
not the better theory. Hypotheses contradicting well-confirmed theories grve
us evidence that cannot be obtained in any other way. Proliferation of
theories is beneficial for science, while uniformity impairs its critical power.
Uniformity also endangers the free development of the individual.
4 33
There is no idea, however ancient and absurd, that is not capable of
improving our knowledge. The whole history of thought is absorbed into
Science and is used for improving every single theory. Nor is political
interference rejected. It may be needed to overcome the chauvinism of science
that resists alternatives to the status quo.
5 39
No theory ever agrees with all the facts in its domain, yet it is not always the
theory that is to blame. Facts are constituted by older ideologies, and a clash
6 AGAINST METHOD

between facts and theories may be proof of progress. It is also a first step in our
attempt to find the principles implicit in familiar observational notions.

6 54
As an example of such an attempt I examine the tower argument which the
Aristotelians used to refute the motion of the earth. The argument involves
natural interpretations — ideas so closely connected with observations that
it needs a special effort to realize their existence and to determine their
content. Galileo identifies the natural interpretations which are inconsistent
with Copernicus and replaces them by others.

7 65
The new natural interpretations constitute a new and highly abstract
observation language. They are introduced and concealed so that one fails
to notice the change that has taken place (method of anamnesis). They contain
the idea of the relativity of all motion and the law of circular inertia.

8 7
In addition to natural interpretations, Galileo also changes sensations that
seem to endanger Copernicus. He admits that there are such sensations, he
praises Copernicus for having disregarded them, he claims to have removed
them with the help of the telescope. However, he offers no theoretical
reasons why the telescope should be expected to grve a true picture of the sky.
9 86
Nor does the initial experience with the telescope providesuch reasons. The
first telescopic observations of the sky are indistinct, indeterminate,
contradictory and in conflict with what everyone can see with his unaided
eyes. And, the only theory that could have helped to separate telescopic
illusions from veridical phenomena was refuted by simple tests.

10 103
On the other hand, there are some telescopic phenomena which are plainly
Copernican. Galileo introduces these phenomena as independent evidence
for Copernicus while the situation is rather that one refuted view —
Copernicanism — has a certain similarity with phenomena emerging from
another refuted view — the idea that telescopic phenomena are faithful
images of the sky.

11 106
Such ЛirrationalС methods of support are needed because of the Лuneven
developmentС (Marx, Lenin) of different parts of science. Copernicanism and
other essential ingredients of modern science survived only because reason
was frequently overruled in their past.


ANALYTICAL INDEX 7
12 123
GalileoСs method works in other fields as well. For example, it can be used to
eliminate the existing arguments against materialism, and to put an end to
the philosophical mind/body problem (the corresponding scientific
problems remain untouched, however). It does not follow that it should be
universally applied.
13 125
The Church at the time of Galileo not only kept closer to reason as defined
then and, in part, even now: it also considered the ethical and social
consequences of GalileoСs views. Its indictment of Galileo was rational and
only opportunism and a lack of perspective can demand a revision.
14 135
GalileoСs inquiries formed only a small part of the so-called Copernican
Revolution. Adding the remaining elements makes it still more difficult to
reconcile the development with familiar principles of theory evaluation.
15 147
observational terms and theoretical terms. None of these distinctions plays a
Лrole in scientific practice. Attempts to enforce them would have disastrous
consequences. PopperСs critical rationalism fails for the same reasons.
Appendix 1 159
16 164
Finally, the kind of comparison that underlies most methodologies is possible
only in some rather simple cases. It breaks down when we try to compare
non-scientific views with science and when we consider the most advanced,
most general and therefore most mythological parts of science itself.
Appendix 2 209
17 214
18 230
ЛYet it is possible to evaluate standards of rationality and to improve them.


8 AGAINST METHOD

19 238
Science is neither a single tradition, nor the best tradition there is, except for
people who have become accustomed to its presence, its benefits and its
disadvantages. In a democracy it should be separated from the state just as
churches are now separated from the state.

20 252
The point of view underlying this book is not the result of a well-planned
train of thought but of arguments prompted by accidental encounters. Anger
at the wanton destruction of cultural achievements from which we all could
have learned, at the conceited assurance with which some intellectuals
interfere with the lives of people, and contempt for the treacly phrases they
use to embellish their misdeeds was and still is the motive force behind my
work.


——— _ Introduction ———
Ordnung ist heutzutage meistens dort,
wo nichts ist.
Es ist eine Mangelerscheinung.
BRECHT
The = hin is written in the conviction ren a

The reason is not difficult to find.

ЛHistory generally, and the history of revolution in particular, is
always richer in content, more varied, more many-sided, more lively
and subtle than evenС the best historian and the best methodologist
can imagine.' History is full of Лaccidents and conjunctures and
curious juxtapositions of eventsС? and it demonstrates to us the
Лcomplexity of human change and the unpredictable character of the
ultimate consequences of any given act or decision of menС.? Are we
really to believe that the naive and simple-minded rules which
methodologists take as their guide are capable of accounting for such
a Лmaze of interactionsС?* And is it not clear that qacceaeta

1. ЛHistory as a whole, and the history of revolutions in particular, is always richer
in content, more varied, more multif orm, more lively and ingenious than is imagined
by even the best parties, the most conscious vanguards of the most advanced classesС
(V.1. Lenin, ЛLeft-Wing Communism — An Infantile DisorderС, Selected Works, Vol. 3,
London, 1967, p. 401). Leninis addressing parties and revolutionary vanguards rather
than scientists and methodologists; the lesson, however, is the same. Cf. footnote 5.

2 Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History, New York, 1965, p. 66.

. ibid., p. 21.
4. ibid., p.25, cf. Hegel, Philosophie der Geschichte, Werke, Vol. 9, ed. Edward Gans,
Berlin, 1837, p. 9: ЛBut what experience and history teach us is this, that nations and
10 AGAINST METHOD

This is indeed the conclusion that has been drawn by intelligent
and thoughtful observers. “Two very important practical conclusions
follow from this [character of the historical process], writes Lenin,>
continuing the passage from which I have just quoted. ЛFirst, that in
order to fulfil its task, the revolutionary class [i.e. the class of those
who want to change either a part of society such as science, or society
as a whole] must be able to master ail forms or aspects of social
activity without exception [it must be able to understand, and to
apply, not only one particular methodology, but any methodology,
and any variation thereof it can imagine] ...; second [it] must be
ready to pass from one to another in the quickest and most
unexpected manner.С

complex medium

containing surprising and unforeseen developments demands
complex procedures and defies analysis on the basis of rules which
governments have never learned anything from history, or actedaccordingtorules that
might have derived from it. Every period has such peculiar circumstances, is in such an
individual state, that decisions will have to be made, and decisions can only be made, in
it and out of it.С - ЛVery cleverС; Лshrewd and very cleverС; ЛNBС writes Lenin in his
marginal notes to this passage. (Collected Works, Vol. 38, London, 1961, p. 307.)

5. ibid. We see here very clearly how a few substitutions can tum a political lesson
into a lesson for methodology. This is not at all surprising. Methodology and politics are
both means for moving from one historical stage to another. We also see how an
individual, such as Lenin, who is not intimidated by traditional boundaries and whose
thought is not tied to the ideology of a particular profession, can give usef ul advice to
everyone, philosophers of science included. In the 19th century the idea of an elastic
and historically informed methodology was a matter of course. Thus Emst Mach
wrote in his book Erkenntnis und Irrtum, Neudruck, Wissenschaftiche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, 1980, p. 200: ЛIt is often said that research cannot be taught. Thatis
quite correct, in a certain sense. The schemata of formal logic and of inductrve logic are
oflittle use for the intellectual situations are never exactly the same. But the examples
of great scientists are very suggestive.С They are not suggestive because we can abstract
rules from them and subject future research to their jurisdiction; they are suggestive
because they make the mind nimble and capable of inventing entirely new research
traditions. For a more detailed account of MachСs philosophy see my essay Farewell 10
Reason, London, 1987, Chapter 7, as well as Vol. 2, Chapters 5 and 6 of my
Philosophical Papers, Cambridge, 1981.

6. Albert Einstein, Albert Einstein: Philosopher Scientist, ed. P.A. Schilpp, New
York, 1951, pp. 683f.


INTRODUCTION i
have been set up in advance and without regard to the ever-changing
conditions of history.

Nowitis, of course, possible tosimplifythe medium inwhich a scientist
works by simplifying its main actors. The history of science, after all,
does not just consist of facts and conclusions drawn from facts. It also
contains ideas, interpretations of facts, problems created by conflicting
interpretations, mistakes, and so on. On closer analysis we even find
thatscience knows no Лbare factsС at all but that the ЛfactsС that enter our oO
knowledge are already viewed in a certain way and are, therefore,
essentially ideational. This being the case, the history of science willbe
as complex, chaotic, full of mistakes, and entertaining as the ideas it
contains, and these ideas in turn will be as complex, chaotic, full of
mistakes, and entertaining as are the minds of those who invented
them. Conversely, alittle brainwashing will go along way in making the
history of science duller, simpler, more uniform, more ЛobjectiveС and
more easily accessible to treatment by strict and unchangeable rules.

Scientific education as we know it today has precisely this aim. It
simplifies ЛscienceС by simplifying its participants: first, a domain of
research is defined. The domain is separated from the rest of history
(physics, for example, is separated from metaphysics and from
theology) and given a ЛlogicС of its own. A thorough training in such a
ЛlogicС then conditions those working in the domain; it makes their
actions more uniform and it freezes large parts of the historical process
as well. Stable ЛfactsС arise and persevere despite the vicissitudes of
history. An essential part of the training that makes such facts appear
consists in the attempt to inhibit intuitions that might lead to a oO
blurring of boundaries. A personСs religion, for example, or his
metaphysics, or his sense of humour (his natural sense of humour and
not the inbred and always rather nasty kind of jocularity one finds in
specialized professions) must not have the slightest connection with
his scientific activity. His imagination is restrained, and even his
language ceases to be his own. This is again reflected in the nature of
scientific ЛfactsС which are experienced as being independent of
opinion, belief, and cultural background.

It is thus possible to create a tradition that is held together by strict
Tules, and that is also successful to some extent. But is it desirable to
support such a tradition to the exclusion of everything else? Should
we transfer to it the sole rights for dealing in knowledge, so that any
result that has been obtained by other methods is at once ruled out of
court? And did scientists ever remain within the boundaries of the
traditions they defined in this narrow way? These are the questions I
intend to ask in the present essay. And to these questions my answer
will be a firm and resounding NO.


12 AGAINST METHOD

There are_two reasons why such an answer seems to be
Epistemological prescriptions may look splendid when compared
with other epistemological prescriptions, or with general principles —
but who can guarantee that they are the best way to discover, not just
a few isolated ЛfactsС, but also some deep-lying secrets of nature?

It is in conflict Лwith the cultivation of individuality which
alone produces, or can produce, well-developed human beingsС;Ф it
Лmaims by compression, like a Chinese ladyСs foot, every part of
human nature which stands out prominently, and tends to make a
person markedly different in outlineС® from the ideals of rationality
that happen to be fashionable in science, or in the philosophy of
Sa seeec eas

It is surprising to see how rarely the stultifying effect of Лthe Laws
of ReasonС or of scientific practice is examined by professional
anarchists. Professional anarchists oppose any kind of restriction and
they demand that the individual be permitted to develop freely,
unhampered by laws, duties or obligations. And yet they swallow
without protest all the severe standards which scientists and logicians
impose upon research and upon any kind of knowledge-creating and
knowledge-changing activity. Occasionally, the laws of scientific
method, or what are thought to be the laws of scientific method
by a particular writer, are even integrated into anarchism itself.
ЛAnarchism is a world concept based upon a mechanical explanation
of all phenomena,С writes Kropotkin.? ЛIts method of investigation is

7. John Stuart Mill, ЛOn LibertyС, in The Philosophy of John Stuart Mill, ed. Marshall
Cohen, New York, 1961, p. 258.

8. ibid., p. 265.

9. Peter Alexeivich Kropotkin, ЛModern Science and AnarchismС, KropotksnСs
Revolutionary Pamphlets, ed. R.W. Baldwin, New York, 1970, pp. 150-2. ЛIt is one of
IbsenСs great distinctions that nothing was valid for him but science.С B. Shaw, Back to
Methuselah, New York, 1921, p. xcvii. Commenting on these and similar phenomena
Strindberg writes (Antibarbarus): ЛA generation that had the courage to get rid of God,
tocrush the state and church, and to overthrow society and morality, still bowed before
Science. And in Science, where freedom ought to reign, the order of the day was
“believe in the authorities or off with your headФ.Ф


INTRODUCTION 13
that of the exact natural sciences ... the method of induction and
deduction.С ЛIt is not so clear,С writes a modern ЛradicalС professor at
Columbia,'° Лthat scientific research demands an absolute freedom
of speech and debate. Rather the evidence suggests that certain kinds
of unfreedom place no obstacle in the way of science. ...Ф

There are certainly some people to whom this is Лnot so clearС. Let
us, therefore, start with our outline of an anarchistic methodology
and a corresponding anarchistic science. There is no need to fear
that the diminished concern for law and order in science and society
that characterizes an anarchism of this kind will lead to chaos. The
human nervous system is too well organized for that.'' There may,
of course, come a time when it will be necessary to give reason a
temporary advantage and when it will be wise to defend its rules to the
exclusion of everything else. I do not think that we are living in such a
time today.'?

10. R.P. Wolff, The Poverty of Liberalism, Boston, 1968, p. 15. For a criticism of
Wolff see footnote 52 of my essay ЛAgainst MethodС, in Minnesota Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, Vol. 4, Minneapolis, 1970.

11. Even in undetermined and ambiguous situations, uniformity of action is soon
achieved and adhered to tenaciously. See Muzafer Sherif, The Psychology of Social
Norms, New York, 1964.

Changed. (


This is shown both by an examination of historical episodes and by an
abstract analysis of the relation between idea and action. The only principle
that does not inhibit progress is: anything goes.

The idea of a method that contains firm, unchanging, and
absolutely binding principles for conducting the business of science
meets considerable difficulty when confronted with the results of
historical research. We find, then, that there is not a single rule,
however plausible, and however firmly grounded in epistemology,
that is not violated at some time or other. It becomes evident that
such violations are not accidental events, they are not results of
insufficient knowledge or of inattention which might have been
avoided. On the contrary, we see that they are necessary for progress. Indeed, one of the most striking features of recent
discussions in the history and philosophy of science is the
realization that events and developments, such as the invention of
atomism in antiquity, the Copernican Revolution, the rise of
modern atomism (kinetic theory; dispersion theory; stereochemistry;
quantum theory), the gradual emergence of the wave theory of
light, occurred only because some thinkers either decided not to be
bound by certain ЛobviousС methodological rules, or because they
unwittingly broke them.

This liberal practice, I repeat, is not just a fact of the history of
science. It is both reasonable and absolutely necessary for the growth of
knowledge. More specifically, one can show the following: given any
tule, however ЛfundamentalС or ЛrationalС, there are always circumstances when it is advisable not only to ignore the rule, but to
adopt its opposite. For example, there are circumstances when it is
advisable to introduce, elaborate, and defend ad hoc hypotheses, or
hypotheses which contradict well-established and generally accepted
experimental results, or hypotheses whose content is smaller than the


ONE Is
content of the existing and empirically adequate alternative, or selfinconsistent hypotheses, and so on.'

There are even circumstances — and they occur rather frequently —
when argument loses its forward-looking aspect and becomes a
hindrance to progress. Nobody would claim that the teaching of small
children is exclusively a matter of argument (though argument may
enter into it, and should enter into it to a larger extent than is
customary), and almost everyone now agrees that what looks like a
result of reason — the mastery of a language, the existence of a richly
articulated perceptual world, logical ability - is due partly to
indoctrination and partly to a process of growth that proceeds with the
force of natural law. And where arguments do seem to have an effect,
this is more often due to their physical repetition than to their semantic
content.

Having admitted this much, we must also concede the possibility
of non-argumentative growth in the adult as well as in (the theoretical
Parts of) institutions such as science, religion, prostitution, and so on.

1. One of the few thinkers to understand this feature of the development of
knowledge was Niels Bohr: Л.. .he would never try to outline any finished picture, but
would patiently go through all the phases of the development of a problem, starting
from some apparent paradox, and gradually leading to its elucidation. In fact, he never
regarded achieved results in any other light than as starting points for further
exploration. In speculating about the prospects of some line of investigation, he would
dismiss the usual consideration of simplicity, elegance or even consistency with the
remark that such qualities can only be properly judged after [my italics] the event...Ф
L. Rosenfeld in Niels Bohr. His Life and Work as seen by his Friends and Colleagues,
S. Rosental (ed.), New York, 1967, p. 117. Now science is never a completed process,
therefore it is always ЛbeforeС the event. Hence simplicity, elegance or consistency are
never necessary conditions of (scientific) practice.

Considerations such as these are usually criticized by the childish remark that a
contradiction ЛentailsС everything. But contradictions do not ЛentailС anything unless
people use them in certain ways. And people will use them as entailing everything only
if they accept some rather simple-minded rules of derivation. Scientists proposing
theories with logical faults and obtaining interesting results with their help (for
example: the results of early forms of the calculus; of a geometry where lines consist of
points, planes of lines and volumes of planes; the predictions of the older quantum
theory and of early forms of the quantum theory of radiation — and so on) evidently
proceed according to different rules. The criticism therefore falls back on its authors
unless it can be shown that a logically decontaminated science has better results. Such
a demonstration is impossible. Logically perfect versions (if such versions exist)
usually arrive only long after the imperfect versions have enriched science by their
contributions. For example, wave mechanics was not a Лlogical reconstructionС of
preceding theories; it was an attempt to preserve their achievements and to solve the
Physical problems that had arisen from their use. Both the achievements and the
problems were produced in a way very different from the ways of those who want to
Subject everything to the tyranny of ЛlogicС.


16 AGAINST METHOD

We certainly cannot take it for granted that what is possible for a
small child — to acquire new modes of behaviour on the slightest
provocation, to slide into them without any noticeable effort — is
beyond the reach of his elders. One should rather expect that
catastrophic changes in the physical environment, wars, the
breakdown of encompassing systems of morality, political revolutions, will transform adult reaction patterns as well, including
important patterns of argumentation. Such a transformation may
again be an entirely natural process and the only function ofa rational
argument may lie in the fact that it increases the mental tension that
preceded and caused the behavioural outburst.

Now, if there are events, not necessarily arguments, which cause us
to adopt new standards, including new and more complex forms of
argumentation, is it then not up to the defenders of the status quo to
provide, not just counter-arguments, but also contrary causes?
(ЛVirtue without terror is ineffective,С says Robespierre.) And if the
old forms of argumentation turn out to be too weak a cause, must not
these defenders either give up or resort to stronger and more
ЛirrationalС means? (It is very difficult, and perhaps entirely
impossible, to combat the effects of brainwashing by argument.)
Even the most puritanical rationalist will then be forced to stop
reasoning and to use propaganda and coercion, not because some of his
reasons have ceased to be valid, but because the psychological conditions
which make them effective, and capable of influencing others, have
disappeared. And what is the use of an argument that leaves people
unmoved?

Of course, the problem never arises quite in this form. The
teaching of standards and their defence never consists merely in
putting them before the mind of the student and making them as clear
as possible. The standards are supposed to have maximal causal
Cfficagy as well. This makes it very difficult indeed to distinguish
between the /ogical force and the material effect of an argument. Just as a
well-trained pet will obey his master no matter how great the
confusion in which he finds himself, and no matter how urgent the
need to adopt new patterns of behaviour, so in the very same way a
well-trained rationalist will obey the mental image of his master, he
will conform to the standards of argumentation he has learned, he oO
will adhere to these standards no matter how great the confusion in
which he finds himself, and he will be quite incapable of realizing that
what he regards as the Лvoice of reasonС is but a causal after-effect of the
training he had received. He will be quite unable to discover that the
appeal to reason to which he succumbs so readily is nothing but a
political manoeuvre.


ONE 17

That interests, forces, propaganda and brainwashing techniques
play a much greater role than is commonly believed in the growth of
our knowledge and in the growth of science, can also be seen from an
analysis of the relation between idea and action. It is often taken for
granted that a clear and distinct understanding of new ideas
precedes, and should precede, their formulation and their institutional expression. First, we have an idea, or a problem, then we act, i.e.
either speak, or build, or destroy. Yet this is certainly not the way in
which small children develop. They use words, they combine them,
they play with them, until they grasp a meaning that has so far been
beyond their reach. And the initial playful activity is an essential 6
prerequisite of the final act of understanding. There is no reason why
this mechanism should cease to function in the adult. We must
expect, for example, that the idea of liberty could be made clear only
by means of the very same actions, which were supposed to create
liberty. Creation of a thing, and creation plus full understanding of a
correct idea of the thing, are very often parts of one and the same indivisible
process and cannot be separated without bringing the process to a
stop. The process itself is not guided by a well-defined programme,
and cannot be guided by such a programme, for it contains the
conditions for the realization of all possible programmes. It is guided
rather by a vague urge, by a ЛpassionС (Kierkegaard). The passion
gives rise to specific behaviour which in turn creates the circumstances and the ideas necessary for analysing and explaining the
process, for making it ЛrationalС.

The development of the Copernican point of view from Galileo to
the 20th century is a perfect example of the situation I want to
describe. We start with a strong belief that runs counter to
contemporary reason and contemporary experience. The belief
spreads and finds support in other beliefs which are equally
unreasonable, if not more so (law of inertia; the telescope). Research
now gets deflected in new directions, new kinds of instruments are
built, ЛevidenceС is related to theories in new ways until there arises an
ideology that is rich enough to provide independent arguments for
any particular part of it and mobile enough to find such arguments
whenever they seem to be required. We can say today that Galileo
Was on the right track, for his persistent pursuit of what once seemed
to be a silly cosmology has by now created the material needed to
defend it against all those who will accept a view only if it is told ina
Certain way and who will trust it only if it contains certain magical
Phrases, called Лobservational reportsС. And this is not an exception —
Itis the normal case: theories become clear and ЛreasonableС only after
incoherent parts of them have been used for a long time. Such


18 AGAINST METHOD

Now, when we attempt to describe and to understand developments of this kind in a general way, we are, of course, obliged to
appeal to the existing forms of speech which do not take them into
account and which must be distorted, misused, beaten into new
: in order to fit unforeseen situations =

(Incidentally, it should be pointed out that my frequent use
of such words as ЛprogressС, ЛadvanceС, ЛimprovementС, etc., does
not mean that I claim to possess special knowledge about what
is good and what is bad in the sciences and that I want to impose
this knowledge upon my readers. Everyone can read the terms in
his own way and in accordance with the tradition to which he
belongs. Thus for an empiricist, ЛprogressС will mean transition
to a theory that provides direct empirical tests for most of its basic
assumptions. Some people believe the quantum theory to be a
theory of this kind. For others, ЛprogressС may mean unification
and harmony, perhaps even at the expense of empirical adequacy.
This is how Einstein viewed the general theory of relativity. And
my thesis is that anarchism helps to achieve progress in any one of
the senses one cares to choose. Even a law-and-order science will
succeed only if anarchistic moves are occasionally allowed to take
place.)

It is clear, then, that the idea of a fixed method, or of a fixed theory
of rationality, rests on too naive a view of man and his social
surroundings. To those who look at the rich material provided by
history, and who are not intent on impoverishing it in order to please
their lower instincts, their craving for intellectual security in the form
of clarity, precision, ЛobjectivityС, ЛtruthС, it will become clear that
there is only one principle that can be defended under all

2. Herbert Marcuse, Reason and Revolution, London, 1941, p. 130.

3. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, Vol. 1, Hamburg, 1965, p. 6.


ONE 19
circumstances and in all stages of human development. It is the
principle: anything goes.

This abstract principle must now be examined and explained in
concrete detail.


For example, we may use hypotheses that contradict well-confirmed theories
and/or well-established experimental results. We may advance science by
proceeding counterinductively.
Examining the principle in concrete detail means tracing the
consequences of ЛcounterrulesС which oppose familiar rules of the
scientific enterprise. To see how this works, let us consider

(or leaves the situation unchanged)
while disagreement endangers it, and perhaps even forces us to
eliminate it.

The

ЛcounterruleС corresponding to it advises us to introduce and
elaborate hypotheses which are inconsistent with well-established
theories and/or well-established facts. It advises us to proceed
counterinductively.

The counterinductive procedure gives rise to the following
questions: Is counterinduction more reasonable than induction? Are
there circumstances favouring its use? What are the arguments for it?
What are the arguments against it? Is perhaps induction always
preferable to counterinduction? And so on.

These questions will be answered in two steps.

The results may be summarized as follows.

In the first case it emerges that the evidence that might refute a
theory can often be unearthed only with the help of an incompatible
alternative: (which goes back to Newton and which is still
very popular todaС


TWO 21
horse. Also, some of the most important formal properties of a theory
are found by contrast, and not by analysis. A scientist who wishes to
maximize the empirical content of the views he holds and who wants
to understand them as clearly as he possibly can must therefore
introduce other views; that is, he must adopt a pluralistic methodology.
He must compare ideas with other ideas rather than with
ЛexperienceС and he must try to improve rather than discard the views
that have failed in the competition. Proceeding in this way he will
retain the theories of man and cosmos that are found in Genesis, or in (o)
the Pimander, he will elaborate them and use them to measure the
success of evolution and other ЛmodernС views. He may then discover
that the theory of evolution is not as good as is generally assumed and
that it must be supplemented, or entirely replaced, by an improved
version of Genesis. Knowledge so conceived is not a series of selfconsistent theories that converges towards an ideal view; it is not a
gradual approach to the truth. It is rather an ever increasing ocean of
mutually incompatible alternatives, each single theory, each fairy-tale,
each myth that is part of the collection forcing the others into greater
articulation and all of them contributing, via this process of
competition, to the development of our consciousness. Nothing is
ever settled, no view can ever be omitted from a comprehensive
account. Plutarch or Diogenes Laertius, and not Dirac or von
Neumann, are the models for presenting a knowledge of this kind in
which the history of a science becomes an inseparable part of the
science itself — it is essential for its further development as well as for
giving content to the theories it contains at any particular moment.
Experts and laymen, professionals and dilettanti, truth-freaks and
liars — they all are invited to participate in the contest and to make
their contribution to the enrichment of our culture. The task of the
scientist, however, is no longer Лto search for the truthС, or Лto praise
godС, or Лto systematize observationsС, or Лto improve predictionsС.
These are but side effects of an activity to which his attention
is now mainly directed and which is Лto make the weaker case the
cea as the sophists said, and thereby to sustain the motion of the
whole,

_The second ЛcounterruleС which favours hypotheses inconsistent
with observations, facts and experimental results, needs no special
defence, for there is not a single interesting theory that agrees with all
the known facts in its domain. The question is, therefore, not
whether counterinductive theories should be admitted into science;
the question is, rather, whether the existing discrepancies between
theory and fact should be increased, or diminished, or what else
should be done with them.


22 AGAINST METHOD

To answer this question it suffices to remember that observational
reports, experimental results, ЛfactualС statements, either contain
theoretical assumptions or assert them by the manner in which they
are used. (For this point cf. the discussion of natural interpretations
in Chapters 6ff.) Thus our habit of saying Лthe table is brownС when
we view it under normal circumstances, with our senses in good
order, but Лthe table seems to be brownС when either the lighting
conditions are poor or when we feel unsure in our capacity of
observation expresses the belief that there are familiar circumstances when our senses are capable of seeing the world Лas it
really isС and other, equally familiar circumstances, when they are
deceived. It expresses the belief that some of our sensory
impressions are veridical while others are not. We also take it for
granted that the material medium between the object and us exerts
no distorting influence, and that the physical entity that establishes E
the contact — light — carries a true picture. All these are abstract,
and highly doubtful, assumptions which shape our view of the world
without being accessible to a direct criticism. Usually, we are not
even aware of them and we recognize their effects only when we
encounter an entirely different cosmology: prejudices are found by
contrast, not by analysis. The material which the scientist has at his
disposal, his most sublime theories and his most sophisticated
techniques included, is structured in exactly the same way. It again
contains principles which are not known and which, if known,
would be extremely hard to test. (As a result, a theory may clash
with the evidence not because it is not correct, but because the oO
evidence is contaminated.)

Now-— how can we possibly examine something we are using all the
time? How can we analyse the terms in which we habitually express
our most simple and straightforward observations, and reveal their
presuppositions? How can we discover the kind of world we
presuppose when proceeding as we do?

The answer is clear: we cannot discover it from the inside. We need
an external standard of criticism, we need a set of alternative
assumptions or, as these assumptions will be quite general, (o>
constituting, as it were, an entire alternative world, we need a dreamworld in order to discover the features of the real world we think we inhabit
(and which may actually be just another dream-world). The first step
in our criticism of familiar concepts and procedures, the first step in
our criticism of ЛfactsС, must therefore be an attempt to break the
circle. We must invent a new conceptual system that suspends, or
clashes with, the most carefully established observational results,
confounds the most plausible theoretical principles, and introduces


TWO 23

erceptions that cannot form part of the existing perceptual world.'

Ais step is again counterinductive. Counterinduction is, therefore,
always reasonable and it has always a chance of success.

In the following seven chapters, this conclusion will be developed
in greater detail and it will be elucidated with the help of historical
examples. One might therefore get the impression that I recommend
a new methodology which replaces induction by counterinduction
and uses a multiplicity of theories, metaphysical views, fairy-tales
instead of the customary pair theory/observation.Ф This impression
would certainly be mistaken. My intention is not to replace one set of
general rules by another such set: my intention is, rather, to convince
the reader that all methodologies, even the most obvious ones, have their
limits. The best way to show this is to demonstrate the limits and even
the irrationality of some rules which she, or he, is likely to regard as
basic. In the case of induction (including induction by falsification)
this means demonstrating how well the counterinductive procedure
can be supported by argument. Always remember that the
demonstrations and the rhetorics used do not express any Лdeep
convictionsС of mine. They merely show how easy it is to lead people
by the nose in a rational way. An anarchist is like an undercover agent
who plays the game of Reason in order to undercut the authority of
Reason (Truth, Honesty, Justice, and so on).

—___

2. This is how Professor Eman McMullin interpreted some earlier papers of
mine. See ЛA Taxonomy of the Relations between History and Philosophy of ScienceС,
Minnesota Studies, Vol. 5, Minneapolis, 1971.

3. ЛDadaС, says Hans Richter in Dada: Art and Anti-Art, Лnot only had no
Programme, it was against all programmes.С This does not exclude the skilful defence
of programmes to show the chimerical character of any defence, however ЛrationalС. (In
the same way an actor or a playwright could produce all the outer manifestations of

Лdeep loveС in order to debunk the idea of Лdeep loveС itself. Example: Pirandello.)


The consistency condition which demands that new hypotheses agree with
accepted theories is unreasonable because it preserves the older theory, and
not the better theory. Hypotheses contradicting well-confirmed theories give
us evidence that cannot be obtained in any other way. Proliferation of
theories is beneficial for science, while uniformity impairs its critical power.
Uniformity also endangers the free development of the individual.
eee
ooutictency randitinn |

Prima facie, the case of consistency condition can be dealt with in a

few words.
it may is)

well be that the differences of prediction are too small to be detected
by experiment. Note also that what is being asserted is not the
inconsistency of, say, NewtonСs theory and GalileoСs law, but rather the
inconsistency of some consequences of NewtonСs theory in the domain
of validity of GalileoСs law, and GalileoСs law. In the last case, the
situation is especially clear. GalileoСs law asserts that the acceleration
of free fall is a constant, whereas application of NewtonСs theory to
the surface of the earth gives an acceleration that is not constant but

1. The consistency condition goes back to Aristotle at least. It plays an important
part in NewtonСs philosophy (though Newton himself constantly violated it). Itis taken
for granted by many 20th-century scientists and philosophers of science.

2. Pierre Duhem, The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, New York, 1962,
pp. 180ff.


ЛTHREE 25
decreases (although imperceptibly) with the distance from the centre
of the earth.

To speak more abstractly: consider a theory TС that successfully
describes the situation inside domain DС. TС agrees with a finite
number of observations (et their class be F) and it agrees with these
observations inside a margin M of error. Any alternative that
contradicts TС outside F and inside M is supported by exactly the
same observations and is therefore acceptable if TС was acceptable (I
shall assume that F are the only observations made). The consistency
condition is much less tolerant. It eliminates a theory or a hypothesis
not because it disagrees with the facts; it eliminates it because it
disagrees with another theory, with a theory, moreover, whose
confirming instances it shares. It thereby makes the as yet untested
part of that theory a measure of validity. The only difference between
such a measure and a more recent theory is age and familiarity. Had
the younger theory been there first, then the consistency condition
would have worked in its favour. “The first adequate theory has the
right of priority over equally adequate aftercomers.С? In this respect
the effect of the consistency condition is rather similar to the effect of
the more traditional methods of transcendental deduction, analysis
of essences, phenomenological analysis, linguistic analysis. It
contributes to the preservation of the old and familiar not because of
any inherent advantage in it but because it is old and familiar. This is
not the only instance where on closer inspection a rather surprising
similarity emerges between modern empiricism and some of the
school philosophies it attacks.

Now it seems to me that these brief considerations, although
leading to an interesting tactical criticism of the consistency
condition, and to some first shreds of support for counterinduction,
do not yet go to the heart of the matter. They show that an alternative
to the accepted point of view which shares its confirming instances
cannot be eliminated by factual reasoning. They do not show that such
an alternative is acceptable; and even less do they show that it shouldbe
used. It is bad enough, a defender of the consistency condition might
point out, that the accepted view does not possess full empirical
support. Adding new theories of an equally unsatisfactory character will
not improve the situation; nor is there much sense in trying to replace
the accepted theories by some of their possible alternatives. Such
replacement will be no easy matter. A new formalism may have to be
learned and familiar problems may have to be calculated in a new
_—

3. C. Truesdell, ЛA Program Toward Rediscovering the Rational Mechanics of
the Age of ReasonС, Archives for the History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 1, p. 14.


26 AGAINST METHOD.

way. Textbooks must be rewritten, university curricula readjusted,
experimental results reinterpreted. And what will be the result of all
the effort? Another theory which from an empirical standpoint has no
advantage whatsoever over and above the theory it replaces. The only
real improvement, so the defender of the consistency condition will
continue, derives from the addition of new facts. Such new facts will
either support the current theories, or they will force us to modify
them by indicating precisely where they go wrong. In both cases they
will precipitate real progress and not merely arbitrary change. The
proper procedure must therefore consist in the confrontation of the
accepted point of view with as many relevant facts as possible. The
exclusion of alternatives is then simply a measure of expediency: their
invention not only does not help, it even hinders progress by
absorbing time and manpower that could be devoted to better things.
The consistency condition eliminates such fruitless discussion and it
forces the scientist to concentrate on the facts which, after all, are the
only acceptable judges of a theory. This is how the practising scientist
will defend his concentration on a single theory to the exclusion of
empirically possible alternatives.

It is worthwhile repeating the reasonable core of this argument.
Theories should not be changed unless there are pressing reasons for
doing so. The only pressing reason for changing a theory is
disagreement with facts. Discussion of incompatible facts will
therefore lead to progress. Discussion of incompatible hypotheses Oo
will not. Hence, it is sound procedure to increase the number of
relevant facts. It is not sound procedure to increase the number of
factually adequate, but incompatible, alternatives. One might wish to
add that formal improvements such as increased elegance, simplicity,
generality, and coherence should not be excluded. But once these
improvements have been carried out, the collection of facts for the
purpose of tests seems indeed to be the only thing left to the scientist.

And so it is — provided facts exist, and are available independently of
whether or not one considers alternatives to the theory to be tested. This
assumption, on which the validity of the foregoing argument depends
in a most decisive manner, I shall call the assumption of the relative
autonomy of facts, or the autonomy principle. It is not asserted by this
principle that the discovery and description of facts is independent of
all theorizing. But it is asserted that the facts which belong to the
empirical content of some theory are available whether or not one
considers alternatives to this theory. I am not aware that this very
important assumption has ever been explicitly formulated as a
separate postulate of the empirical method. However, it is clearly
implied in almost all investigations which deal with questions of


THREE 27
confirmation and test. All these investigations use a model in which a
single theory is compared with a class of facts (or observation
statements) which are assumed to be ЛgivenС somehow. I submit that
this is much too simple a picture of the actual situation. Facts and
theories are much more intimately connected than is admitted by the
autonomy principle. Not only is the description of every single fact
dependent on some theory (which may, of course, be very different
from the theory to be tested), but there also exist facts which cannot
be unearthed except with the help of alternatives to the theory to be
tested, and which become unavailable as soon as such alternatives are
excluded. This suggests that the methodological unit to which we
must refer when discussing questions of test and empirical content is
constituted by a whole set of partly overlapping, factually adequate, but
mutually inconsistent theories. In the present chapter only the barest
outlines will be given of such a test model. However, before doing
this, I want to discuss an example which shows very clearly the
function of alternatives in the discovery of critical facts.

It is now known that the Brownian particle is a perpetual motion
machine of the second kind and that its existence refutes the
phenomenological second law. Brownian motion therefore belongs
to the domain of relevant facts for the law. Now could this relation
between Brownian motion and the law have been discovered in a
direct manner i.e. could it have been discovered by an examination of
the observational consequences of the phenomenological theory that
did not make use of an alternative theory of heat? (This question is
readily divided into two: (1) Could the relevance of the Brownian
particle have been discovered in this manner? (2) Could it have been
demonstrated that it actually refutes the second law?

The answer to the first question is that we do not know. It is
impossible to say what would have happened if the kinetic theory had
not been introduced into the debate. It is my guess, however, that in
that case the Brownian particle would have been regarded as an
oddity —- in much the same way as some of the late Professor
EhrenhaftСs astounding effects were regarded as an oddity, and thatit
would not have been given the decisive position it assumed in
contemporary theory. The answer to the second question is simply —
No. Consider what the discovery of an inconsistency between the
Phenomenon of Brownian motion and the second law would have
required. It would have required: (a) measurement of the exact
motion of the particle in order to ascertain the change in its kinetic
energy plus the energy spent on overcoming the resistance of the
fluid; and (b) precise measurements of temperature and heat transfer
in the surrounding medium in order to establish that any loss


28 AGAINST METHOD

occurring there was indeed compensated by the increase in the
energy of the moving particle and the work done against the fluid.
Such measurements are beyond experimental possibilities;* neither
the heat transfer nor the path of the particle can be measured with the
desired precision. Hence a ЛdirectС refutation of the second law that
considers only the phenomenological theory and the ЛfactsС of the
Brownian motion is impossible. It is impossible because of the
structure of the world in which we live and because of the laws that
are valid in this world. And as is well known, the actual refutation
was brought about in a very different manner. It was brought about
via the kinetic theory and EinsteinСs utilization of it in his calculation
of the statistical properties of Brownian motion. In the course of
this procedure, the phenomenological theory (TС) was incorporated
into the wider context of statistical physics (T) in such a manner
that the consistency condition was violated, and it was only then that
crucial experiments were staged (investigations of Svedberg and
Perrin).

4. For details cf. R. Fiirth, Zs. Physik, Vol. 81, 1933, pp. 143ff.

5. For these investigations (whose philosophical background derives from
Boltzmann) cf. A. Einstein, /rvestigations on the Theory of the Brownian Motion, ed. R.
Fiirth, New York, 1956, which contains all the relevant papers by Einstein and an exhaustive bibliography by R. Firth. For the experimental work of J. Perrin, see Die
Atome, Leipzig, 1920. For the relation between the phenomenological theory and the
kinetic theory of von Smoluchowski, see ЛExperimentell nachweisbare, der iiblichen
ЛThermodynamik widersprechende MolekularphanomeneС, Physikalische Zs., Vol. 8,
1912, p. 1069, as welll as the brief note by K.R. Popper, ЛIrreversibility, or, Entropy
since 1905", British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 8, 1957, p. 151, which
summarizes the essential arguments. Despite Einstein's epoch-making discoveries
and von SmoluchowskiСs splendid presentation of their consequences (Oeuvres de
Marie Smoluchowski, Cracow, 1927, Vol. 2, pp. 226ff, 316ff, 462A and 530ff), the
present situation in thermodynamics is extremely unclear, especially in view of the
continued presence of some very doubtful ideas of reduction. To be more specific, the
attempt is frequently made to determine the entropy balance of a complex statistical
process by reference to the (refuted) phenomenological law after which fluctuations are
inserted in an ad hoc fashion. For this cf. my note ЛOn the Possibility of a Perpetuum
Mobile of the Second KindС, Mind, Matterand Method, Minneapolis, 1966, p. 409, and
my paper ЛIn Defence of Classical PhysicsС, Studies in the History and Philosophy of
ЛScience, 1, No. 2, 1970.

It ought to be mentioned, incidentally, that in 1903, when Einstein started his work
in thermodynamics, there existed empirical evidence suggesting that Brownian motion
could not be a molecular phenomenon. See F.M. Exner, ЛNotiz zu Browns
MolekularbewegungС,Ann. Phys., No. 2, 1900, p. 843. Exner claimed that the motion
was of orders of magnitude beneath the value to be expected on the equipartition
principle. Einstein (/nvestigations in the Theory of the Brownian Movement, pp. 63ff, esp.
p. 67) gave the following theoretical explanation of the discrepancy: Лsince an observer
operating with definite means of observation in a definite manner can never perceive
the actual path transversed in an arbitrarily small time, a certain mean velocity will


THREE 29

It seems to me that this example is typical of the relation between
fairly general theories, or points of view, and the ЛfactsС. Both the
relevance and the refuting character of decisive facts can be
established only with the help of other theories which, though
factually adequate,Ф are not in agreement with the view to be tested.
This being the case, the invention and articulation of alternatives may
have to precede the production of refuting facts. Empiricism, at least
in some of its more sophisticated versions, demands that the
empirical content of whatever knowledge we possess be increased as
much as possible. Hence the invention of alternatives to the view at the
centre of discussion constitutes an essential part of the empirical method.
Conversely the fact that the consistency condition eliminates
alternatives now shows it to be in disagreement not only with
scientific practice but with empiricism as well. By excluding valuable
tests it decreases the empirical content of the theories that are
permitted to remain (and these, as I have indicated above, will usually
be the theories which were there first); and it especially decreases the
number of those facts that could show their limitations. This is how
empiricists (such as Newton, or some proponents of what has been
called the orthodox interpretation of quantum mechanics) who
defend the consistency condition, being unaware of the complex
nature of scientific knowledge (and, for that matter, of any form of
knowledge) are voiding their favourite theories of empirical content
and thus turning them into what they most despise, viz. metaphysical
doctrines.С

John Stuart Mill has given a fascinating account of the gradual
transformation of revolutionary ideas into obstacles to thought.
When a new view is proposed it faces a hostile audience and excellent
reasons are needed to gain for itan even moderately fair hearing. The
reasons are produced, but they are often disregarded or laughed out
of court, and unhappiness is the fate of the bold inventors. But new
generations, being interested in new things, become curious, they
consider the reasons, pursue them further and groups of researchers
initiate detailed studies. The studies may lead to surprising successes
(they also raise lots of difficulties). Now nothing succeeds like
always appear to him as an instantaneous velocity. But it is clear that the velocity
ascertained thus corresponds to no objective property of the motion under
investigation.С Cf. also Mary Jo Nye, Molecular Reality, London, 1972, pp. 98fF.

6. The condition of factual adequacy will be removed in Chapter 5.

7. The most dramatic confirmation of the orthodox view which made its empirical
nature obvious came by way of Bell's theorem. But Bell was on the side of Einstein, not
of Bohr, whom he regarded as an ЛobscurantistС. Cf. Jeremy Bernstein, Quantum
Profiles, Princeton, 1991, pp. 3ff (for BellСs background) and p. 84 (for ЛobscurantistС).


30 AGAINST METHOD
success, even if it is success surrounded by difficulties. The theory
becomes acceptable as a topic for discussion; it is presented at
meetings and large conferences. The diehards of the status quo feel
an obligation tostudy one paper or another, to make a few grumbling
comments, and perhaps to join in its exploration. There comes then a
moment when the theory is no longer an esoteric discussion topic for
advanced seminars and conferences, but enters the public domain.
There are introductory texts, popularizations; examination questions
start dealing with problems to be solved in its terms. Scientists from
distant fields and philosophers, trying to show off, drop a hint here
and there, and this often quite uninformed desire to be on the right
side is taken as a further sign of the importance of the theory.
Unfortunately, this increase in importance is not accompanied by
better understanding; the very opposite is the case. Problematic
aspects which were originally introduced with the help of carefully
constructed arguments now become basic principles, doubtful points
turn into slogans; debates with opponents become standardized and
also quite unrealistic, for the opponents, having to express
themselves in terms which presuppose what they contest, seem to
raise quibbles, or to misuse words. Alternatives are still employed but
they no longer contain realistic counter-proposals; they only serve as
a background for the splendour of the new theory. Thus we do have
success — but it is the success of a manoeuvre carried out in a void,
= difficulties that were set in advance for solution.
There exist numerous historical examples of the process I have
just described and various authors have commented on it. The most
important recent author is Professor Thomas Kuhn. In his Structure
of Scientific Revolutions,* he distinguishes between science and prescience and, within science, between revolutions andnormal science.
Pre-science, according to him, is pluralistic throughout and
therefore in danger of concentrating on opinions rather than on
things (Bacon made a similar point). The two components of mature
8. Chicago, 1962.


THREE 31
science perfectly agree with the two stages mentioned above except
that Kuhn doubts that science or, for that matter, any activity that
claims to produce factual knowledge can do without a normal
component. Fossils, he seems to say, are needed to give substance to
the debates that occur in the revolutionary component — but he adds
that the latter cannot advance without alternatives. Two earlier
authors are Mill and Niels Bohr. Mill gives a clear and compelling
description of the transition from the early stage of a new view to its
orthodoxy. Debates and reasoning, he writes, are features

belonging to periods of transition, when old notions and feelings have
been unsettled and no new doctrines have yet succeeded to their
ascendancy. At such times people of any mental activity, having given
up their old beliefs, and not feeling quite sure that those they still
retain can stand unmodified listen eagerly to new opinions. But this
state of things is necessarily transitory: some particular body of
doctrine in time rallies the majority round it, organizes social
institutions and modes of action conformably to itself, education
impresses this new creed upon the new generation without the mental
processes that have led to it and by degrees it acquires the very same
power of compression, so long exercised by the creeds of which it had
taken place?

An account of the alternatives replaced, of the process of
replacement, of the arguments used in its course, of the strength of
the old views and the weaknesses of the new, not a Лsystematic
accountС but a historical account of each stage of knowledge, can alleviate
these drawbacks and increase the rationality of oneСs theoretical
commitments. BohrСs presentation of new discoveries has precisely
this pattern; it contains preliminary summaries surveying the past,
moves on to the Лpresent state of knowledgeС and ends up by making
general se for the future.С
greedy victims of some (ancient, or modern) myth, or for the weak and
—_

9. ЛAutobiographyС, quoted from Essential Works of John Stuart Mill, ed. M.
Lerner, New York, 1965, p. 119; my emphasis.
sea, For a more detailed account cf. my Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1, Chapter 16,


32 AGAINST METHOD

(that is compatible with a humanitarian outlook, (To the extent to which
the consistency condition delimits variety, it contains a theological
element which lies, of course, in the worship of ЛfactsС so
characteristic of nearly all empiricism.'')

11. It is interesting to see that the platitudes that directed the Protestants to the
Bible are often almost identical with the platitudes which direct empiricists and other
fundamentalists to their foundation, viz. experience. Thus in his Novum Organum
Bacon demands that all preconceived notions (aphorism 36), opinions (aphorisms
4261), even words (aphorisms 59, 121), Лbe adjured and renounced with firm and
solemn resolution, and the understanding must be completely freed and cleared of
them, so that the access to the kingdom of man, which is founded on the sciences, may
resemble that to the kingdom of heaven, where no admission is conceded, except to
childrenС (aphorism 68). In both cases ЛdisputationС (which is the consideration of
alternatives) is criticized, in both cases we are invited to dispense with it, and in both
cases we are promised an Лimmediate perceptionС, here, of God, and there of Nature.
For the theoretical background of this similarity cf. my essay ЛClassical EmpiricismС, in
RE. Butts(ed.), The Methodological Heritage of Newton, Oxford and Toronto, 1970. For
the strong connections between Puritanism and modern science see R.T. Jones,
Ancients and Moderns, California, 1965, Chapters 5-7. A thorough examination of the
factors that influenced the rise of modern empiricism in England is found in R.K.
Merton, Science, Technology and Society in Seventeenth Century England, New York, 1970
(book version of the 1938 article).


EEO oo 4 ——
ingore, The on fh ae
This finishes the discussion of part one of counterinduction dealing
with the invention and elaboration of hypotheses inconsistent
with a point of view that is highly confirmed and generally accepted.
The result was that a thorough examination of such a point of
view may involve incompatible alternatives so that the (Newtonian)
advice to postpone alternatives until after the first difficulty has arisen
means putting the cart before the horse.

For the alternatives, which he needs to keep the
contest going, may be taken from the past as well. As a matter of fact,
they may be taken from wherever one is able to find them —
from ancient myths and modern prejudices; from the lucubrations
of experts and from the fantasies of cranks. The whole history
of a subject is utilized in the attempt to improve its most recent
—___

1. It is, therefore, important that the alternatives be set against each other and not
be isolated or emasculated by some form of ЛdemythologizationС. Unlike Tillich,
Bultmann and their followers, we should regard the world-views of the Bible, the
Gilgamesh epic, the Iliad, the Edda, as fully fledged alternative cosmologies which can be
used to modify, and even to replace, the ЛscientificС cosmologies of a given period.


34 AGAINST METHOD
This position, which is a natural consequence of the arguments
presented above, is frequently attacked — not by counter-arguments,
which would be easy to answer, but by rhetorical questions. ЛIf any
metaphysics goes,С writes Dr Hesse in her review of an earlier essay
of mine,> Лthen the question arises why we do not go back and exploit
2. Anaccount and a truly humanitarian defence of this position can be found inJ.S.
MillСs On Liberty. PopperСs philosophy, which some people would like tolay onusasthe
one and only humanitarian rationalism in existence today, is but a pale reflection of Mill.
It is specialized, formalistic and elitist, and devoid of the concern for individual
happiness that is such a characteristic feature of Mill. We can understand its
peculiarities when we consider (a) the background of logical positivism, which plays an
important role in the Logic of Scientific Discovery, (b) the unrelenting puritanism of its
author (and of most of his followers), and when we remember the influence of Harriet
Taylor on Mill's life and on his philosophy. There is no Harriet Taylor in PopperСslife.
ЛThe foregoing arguments should also have made it clear that I regard proliferation not
just as an Лexternal catalystС of progress, as Lakatos suggests in his essays (ЛHistory of
Science and Its Rational ReconstructionsС, Boston Studies, Vol. 8, p. 98; ЛPopper on
Demarcation and InductionС, MS, 1970, p. 21 ), but as an essential part of it. Ever since
“Explanation, Reduction, and EmpiricismС (Minnesota Studies, Vol. 3, Minneapolis,
1962), andespecially in ЛHow to Bea GoodEmpiricistС (Delaware Studies, Vol. 2, 1963), |
have argued that alternatives increase the empirical content of the views that happen to
stand in the centre of attention and are, therefore, Лnecessary partsС of the falsifying
process (Lakatos, ЛHistoryС, fn. 27, describing his own position). In ЛReply to CriticismС
(Boston Studies, Vol. 2, 1965) 1 pointed out that Лthe principle of proliferation not only
recommends invention of nem alternatives, it also prevents the elimination of older
theories which have been refuted. The reason is that such theories contribute to the
content of their victorious rivalsС (p. 224). This agrees with LakatosС observation of 1971
that Лalternatives are not merely catalysts, which can later be removed in the rational
reconstructionС (ЛHistoryС, fn. 27), except that Lakatos attributes the hologistic view
fa
3. Mary Hesse, Ratio, No. 9, 1967, p. 93; cf. B.F. Skinner, Beyond Freedom and
Dignity, New York, 1971, p. 5: ЛNo modern physicist would tum to Aristotle for help.Ф
This is neither true, nor would it be an advantage if it were true. Aristotelian ideas
influenced research long after they had allegedly been removed by early modern
astronomy and physics — any history of 17th- or 18th-century science will show that
(example: John HeilbronnСs marvellous Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries,
Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1979). They resurfaced in biology, in the thermodynamics
of open systems and even in mathematics. AristotleСs theory of locomotion (which has
the consequence that a moving object has no precise length and that an object having a
precise location must be at rest) was more advanced than the Galilean view and
showed that ideas which in our time emerged from empirical research can be obtained
by a careful analysis of the problems of the continuum (details on this point in Chapter
8 of my Farewell to Reason, London, 1987). Here as elsewhere the propagandists of a
naive scientism give themselves the air of presenting arguments when all they do is
spread unexamined and ill-conceived rumours.


FOUR 35
the objective criticism of modern science available in Aristotelianism,
or indeed in Voodoo?С — and she insinuates thata criticism of this kind
would be altogether laughable. Her insinuation, unfortunately,
assumes a great deal of ignorance in her readers. Progress was often
achieved by a Лcriticism from the pastС, of precisely the kind that is
now dismissed by her. After Aristotle and Ptolemy, the idea that the
earth moves — that strange, ancient, and Лentirely ridiculousС,*
Pythagorean view — was thrown on the rubbish heap of history, only
tobe revived by Copernicus and to be forged by him into a weapon for
the defeat of its defeaters. The Hermetic writings played an
important part in this revival, which is still not sufficiently
understood,Ф and they were studied with care by the great Newton
himself.® Such developments are not surprising. No idea is ever
examined in all its ramifications and no view is ever given all the
chances it deserves. Theories are abandoned and superseded by
more fashionable accounts long before they have had an opportunit
to show their virtues.

Voodoo, Dr HesseСs piece de resistance, is a

4. Ptolemy, Syntaxis, quoted after the translation of Manitius, Des Claudius
Prolemaeus Handbuch der Astronomie, Vol. 1, Leipzig, 1963, p. 18.

5. For a positive evaluation of the role of the hermetic writings during the
Renaissance cf. F. Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition, London, 1963,
and the literature given there. For a criticism of her position cf. the articles by Mary
Hesse and Edward Rosen in Vol. 5 of the Minnesota Studies for the Philosophy of Science,
ed. Roger Stuewer, Minnesota, 1970; R.S. Westman and J.E. McGuire, Hermeticism
and the Scientific Revolution, Los Angeles, Clark Memorial Library, 1977, as well as
Brian Vickers, Journal of Modem History, 51, 1979.

6. Cf. J.M. Keynes, ЛNewton the ManС, in Essays and Sketches in Biography, New
York, 1956, and, in much greater detail, McGuire and Rattansi, ЛNewton and the
“Pipes of PanФС, Notes and Records of the Royal Society, Vol. 21, No. 2, 1966, pp. 108fF.
For more detailed accounts cf. Frank Manuel, The Religion of Isaac Newton, Oxford,
1974, R.S. WestfallСs monumental biography, Never at Rest, Cambridge, 1980, with
literature, as well as Chapters x and xi of R. Popkin, The Third Force in
Seventeenth-Century Thought, Leiden and New York, 1992.

7. For the scientific content of some myths cf. C. de Santillana, The Origin of
Scientific Thought, New York, 1961, especially the Prologue. ЛWe can see thenС, writes
de Santillana, Лhow so many myths, fantastic and arbitrary in semblance, of which the
Greek tale of the Argonauts is a late offspring, may provide a terminology of image
ЛMotifs, a kind of code which is beginning to be broken. It was meant to allow those who
knew (a) to determine unequivocally the position of given planets in respect to the
earth, to the firmament, and to one another; (b) to present what knowledge there was of
the fabric of the world in the form of tales about Лhow the world beganС. There are two
reasons why this code was not discovered earlier. One is the firm conviction of


36 AGAINST METHOD
case in point. Nobody knows it, everybody uses it as a paradigm of
backwardness and confusion. And yet Voodoo has a firm though still
not sufficiently understood material basis, and a study of its
manifestations can be used to enrich, and perhaps even to revise, our
knowledge of physiology.®

An even more interesting example is the revival of traditional
medicine in Communist China. We start with a familiar development: a great country with great traditions is subjected to Western
domination and is exploited in the customary way. A new generation
recognizes or thinks it recognizes the material and intellectual
superiority of the West and traces it back to science. Science is
imported, taught, and pushes aside all traditional elements. Scientific
chauvinism triumphs: ЛWhat is compatible with science should live,
what is not compatible with science, should dieС.'° ЛScienceС in this
context means not just a specific method, but all the results the
method has so far produced. Things incompatible with the results
must be eliminated. Old style doctors, for example, must either be
historians of science that science did not start before Greece and that scientific results
can only be obtained with the scientific method as it is practised today (and as it was
foreshadowed by Greek scientists). The other reason is the astronomical, geological,
etc., ignorance of most Assyriologists, Aegyptologists, Old Testament scholars, and so
Лon: the apparent primitivism of many myths is just the reflection of the primitive
astronomical, biological, etc., etc., knowledge of their collectors and translators. Since
the discoveries of Hawkins, Marshack, Seidenberg, van der Waerden (Geomeiry and
Algebra in Ancient Civilizations, New York, 1983) and others we have to admit the
existence of an international palaeolithic astronomy that gave rise to schools,
observatories, scientific traditions and most interesting theories. These theories,
which were expressed in sociological, not in mathematical, terms, have left their traces
in sagas, myths, legends and may be reconstructed in a twofold way, by going formard
into the present from the material remains of Stone Age astronomy such as marked
stones, stone observatories, etc., and by going back into the past from the literary
remains which we find in sagas, legends, myths. An example of the first method is A.
Marshack, The Roots of Civilization, New York, 1972. An example of the second is de
Santillana—von Dechend, Hamlet's Mill, Boston, 1969.

8. Cf. Chapter 9 of Lévi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology, New York, 1967. For
the physiological basis of Voodoocf. C.R. Richter, ЛThe Phenomenon of Unexplained
Sudden DeathС, in Gantt (ed.), The Physiological Basis of Psychiatry, as well as W.H.
Cannon, Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage, New York, 1915, and
“VoodooФ DeathС, in American Anthropologist, ns., xliv, 1942. The detailed biological
and meteorological observations made by so-called ЛprimitivesС are reported in
Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind, London, 1966.

9. R.C. Croizier, Traditional Medicine in Modem China, Cambridge, Mass., 1968.
The author gives a very interesting and fair account of developments with numerous
quotations from newspapers, books, pamphlets, but is often inhibited by his respect for
20th-century science.

10. Chou Shao, 1933, as quoted in Croizier, op. cit. p. 109. Cf. also D.W.Y.
Kwok, Scientism in Chinese Thought, New Haven, 1965.


FOUR 37
removed from medical practice, or they must be re-educated. Herbal
medicine, acupuncture, moxibustion and the underlying philosophy
are a thing of the past, no longer to be taken seriously. This was the
attitude up to about 1954 when the condemnation of bourgeois
elements in the Ministry of Health started a campaign for the revival
of traditional medicine. No doubt the campaign was politically
inspired. It contained at least two elements, viz. (1) the identification
of Western science with bourgeois science and (2) the refusal of the
party to exempt science from political supervision'С and to grant
experts special privileges. But it provided the counterforce that was
needed to overcome the scientific chauvinism of the time and to make
a plurality (actually a duality) of views possible. (This is an important
point. It often happens that parts of science become hardened and
intolerant so that proliferation must be enforced from the outside,
and by political means. Of course, success cannot be guaranteed —
see the Lysenko affair. But this does not remove the need for nonscientific controls on science.)

Now this politically enforced dualism has led to most interesting
and puzzling discoveries both in China and in the West and to the oe)
realization that there are effects and means of diagnosis which
modern medicine cannot repeat and for which it has no explanation.
Itrevealed sizeable lacunae in Western medicine. Nor can one expect
that the customary scientific approach will eventually find an answer,
In the case of herbal medicine the approach consists of two steps.'2
First, the herbal concoction is analysed into its chemical constituents.
Then the specific effects of each constituent are determined and the
total effect on a particular organ explained on their basis. This
neglects the possibility that the herb, taken in its entirety, changes the
state of the whole organism and that it is this new state of the whole
organism rather thana specific part of the herbal concoction, a Лmagic
bulletС, as it were, that cures the diseased organ. Here as elsewhere
knowledge is obtained from a multiplicity of views rather than from
the determined application of a preferred ideology. And we realize
that proliferation may have to be enforced by non-scientific agencies
whose power is sufficient to overcome the most powerful scientific
institutions. Examples are the Church, the State, a political party,
Public discontent, or money: the best single entity to get a modern \(
Scientist away from what his Лscientific conscienceС tells him to pursue
is still the dollar (or, more recently, the Swiss franc).

—_ _

Ul. For the tensions between ЛredС and ЛexpertС cf. F. Schurmann, Ideology and
Organization in Communist China, Berkeley, 1966.

12. Cf. M.B. Krieg, Green Medicine, New York, 1964.


38 AGAINST METHOD

Pluralism of theories and metaphysical views is not only important
for methodology, it is also an essential part ofa humanitarian outlook.
Progressive educators have always tried to develop the individuality
of their pupils and to bring to fruition the particular, and sometimes
quite unique, talents and beliefs of a child. Such an education,
however, has very often seemed to be a futile exercise in daydreaming. For is it not necessary to prepare the young for life as it
actually is? Does this not mean that they must learn one particular set of
views to the exclusion of everything else? And, if a trace of their
imagination is still to remain, will it not find its proper application in
the arts or in a thin domain of dreams that has but little to do with the
world we live in? Will this procedure not finally lead to a split between
a hated reality and welcome fantasies, science and the arts, careful
description and unrestrained self-expression? The argument for
proliferation shows that this need not happen. It is possible to retain
what one might call the freedom of artistic creation and to use it to the
full, not just as a road of escape but as a necessary means for
discovering and perhaps even changing the features of the world we
live in. This coincidence of the part (individual man) with the whole
(the world we live in), of the purely subjective and arbitrary with the
objective and lawful, is one of the most important arguments in
favour of a pluralistic methodology. For details the reader is advised
to consult MillСs magnificent essay On Liberty."

13. Cf. my account of this essay in Vol. 1, Chapter 8 and Vol. 2, Chapter 4 of my
Philosophical Papers. Cf. also Appendix 1 of the present essay.


5S
No theory ever agrees with all the facts inits domain, yet it is not always the
theory that is to blame. Facts are constituted by older ideologies, and a clash
between facts and theories may be proof of progress. It is also a first step in our
attempt to find the principles implicit in familiar observational notions.
=e
trouble is not created by rumours, or by the result of sloppy
procedure. It is created by experiments and measurements of the
ae os and mn

The first case is quite familiar: a theory makes a certain numerical
prediction and the value that is actually obtained differs from the
prediction made by more than the margin of error. Precision
instruments are usually involved here. Numerical disagreements
abound in science. They give rise to an Лocean of anomaliesС that
surrounds every single theory.

Thus the Copernican view at the time of Galileo was inconsistent
with facts so plain and obvious that Galileo had to call it Лsurely
falseС.? ЛThere is no limit to my astonishment,С he writes in a
——___

|. For the ЛoceanС and various ways of dealing with it, cf. my ЛReply to CriticismС,
Boston Studies, Vol. 2, 1965, pp. 224ff.

2. Galileo Galilei, The Assayer, quoted in S. Drake and C.D. O'Malley (eds), The
Controversy on the Comets of 1618, London, 1960, p. 185. The Лsurely falseС refers to the
condemnation by Church authorities. But as will be explained in the course of the book
andespecially in Chapter 13, the condemnation was based in part on the Лphilosophical
absurdityС of the idea of a moving earth, i.e. on its empirical failures and its theoretical
inadequacy. See also the next quotation and footnote. ЛAs to the system of PtolemyС,
writes Galileo on this point (184), Лneither Tycho, nor other astronomers, nor even


40 AGAINST METHOD

later work,? Лwhen I reflect that Aristarchus and Copernicus were
able to make reason so conquer sense that, in defiance of the latter,
the former became mistress of their belief.С NewtonСs theory of
gravitation was beset, from the very beginning, by difficulties serious
enough to provide material for refutation.С Even quite recently and in
the non-relativistic domain it could be said that there Лexist numerous
discrepancies between observation and theoryС.> BohrСs atomic
model was introduced, and retained, in the face of precise and
unshakeable contrary evidence.° The special theory of relativity was
retained despite KaufmannСs unambiguous results of 1906, and
despite D.C. MillerСs experiment.Ф The general theory of relativity,
Copernicus could clearly refute it, inasmuch as a most important argument taken from
the movement of Mars and Venus always stood in their way.С The Лmost important
argumentС and GalileoСs resolution are discussed in Chapters 9 and 10.

3. Galileo Galilei, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, Berkeley,
1953, p. 328.

4. AccordingtoNewton the Лmutual actions of comets and planets upon one anotherС
give rise to Лsome inconsiderable irregularities . . . which will be apt to increase, till the
system wants a reformationС, Opticks, New York, 1952, p. 402. What Newton means is
that gravitation disturbs the planets in a way that is likely to blow the planetary system
apart. Babylonian data as used by Ptolemy show that the planetary system has remained
stable for a long time. Newton concluded that it was being periodically ЛreformedС by
divine interventions: God acts as a stabilizing force in the planetary system (and in the
world as a whole, which is constantly losing motion through processes such as inelastic
collisions). One of the ЛirregularitiesС considered by Newton, the great inequality of
Jupiter and Saturn (Prinapia, transl. Motte, ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1934, p. 397) was
shown by Laplace to bea periodic disturbance witha large period. Then Poincaré found
that the series developments customary in the calculations often diverged after they had
shown some convergence while Bruhns discovered that no quantitative methods other
than series expansions could resolve the n-body problem. This wasthe end of the purely
quantitative period in celestial mechanics (details in J. Moser, Annals of Mathematical
ЛStudies, Vol. 77, 1973, Princeton). See also M. Ryabov, An Elementary Survey of Celestial
Mechanics, New York, 1961, for a survey and quantitative results of various methods of
calculation. The qualitative approach is briefly described on pp. 126f. Thusit took more
than two hundred years before one of the many difficulties of this rather successful
theory was finally resolved.

5. Brower-Clemence, Method of Celestial Mechanic, New York, 1961. Also R.H.
Dicke, ЛRemarks on the Observational Basis of General RelativityС, in H.Y. Chiu and
WE. Hoffman (eds), Gravitation and Relativity, New York, 1964, pp. 1-16. For amore
detailed discussion of some of the difficulties of classical celestial mechanics, cf.
J. Chazy, La Théorie de a relativité et laMéchanique céleste, Vol. 1, Chapters 4 and 5, Paris,
1928.

6. Cf. Max Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics, New York,
1966, section 22. For an analysis cf. section 3c/2 of Lakatos, ЛFalsification and the
Methodology of Scientific Research ProgrammesС, in Lakatos~Musgrave (eds),
Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, Cambridge, 1970.

7. W. Kaufmann, ЛUber die Konstitution des ElektronsС, Ann. Phys., No. 19, 1906,
p. 487. Kaufmann stated his conclusion quite unambiguously, and in italics: ЛThe


FIVE 41
though surprisingly successful in a series of occasionally rather
dramatic tests,® had a rough time in areas of celestial mechanics
different from the advance of the perihelion of Mercury.° In the
sixties the arguments and observations of Dicke and others seemed
to endanger even this prediction. The problem is still unresolved. '°
results of the measurements are not compatible with the fundamental assumption of Lorentz
and Einstein.С Lorentz's reaction: Л... it seems very likely that we shall have to
relinquish this idea altogetherС (Theory of Electrons, second edition, p. 213). Ehrenfest:
ЛKaufmann demonstrates that LorentzСs deformable electron is ruled out by the
measurementsС (ЛZur Stabilititsfrage bei den Bucherer-Langevin ElektronenС, Phys.
Zs., Vol. 7, 1906, p. 302). PoincaréСs reluctance to accept the Лnew mechanicsС of
Lorentz can be explained, at least in part, by the outcome of KaufmannСs experiment.
Cf. Science and Method, New York 1960, Book Ill, Chapter 2, section v, where
KaufmannСs experiment is discussed, the conclusion being that the Лprinciple of
relativity . . . cannot have the fundamental importance one was inclined to ascribe to
itС. Cf. also St Goldberg, ЛPoincaréСs Silence and Einstein's RelativityС, British Journal
Лfor the History of Science, Vol. 5, 1970, pp. 73ff, and the literature given there. Einstein
aloneregarded the results as Лimprobable because their basic assumptions, from which
the mass of the moving electron is deduced, are not suggested by theoretical systems
which encompass wider complexes of phenomenaС (Jahrbuch der Radioaktivitaét und
Elekirizitat, Vol. 4, 1907, p. 349). MillerСs work was studied by Lorentz for many years,
but he could not find the trouble. It was only in 1955, twenty-five years after Miller had
finished his experiments, that a satisfactory account of MillerСs results was found. Cf.
RS. Shankland, ЛConversations with EinsteinС, Am. Journ. Phys., Vol. 31, 1963, pp.
47-57, especially p. 51, as well as footnotes 19 and 34; cf. also the inconclusive
discussion at the ЛConference on the Michelson—Morley ExperimentС, Astrophysical
Journal, Vol. 68, 1928, pp. 341 ff.

KaufmannСs experiment was analysed by Max Planck and found to be not decisive:
what had stopped Ehrenfest, Poincaré and Lorentz did not stop Planck. Why? My conjecture is that Planck's firm belief in an objective reality and his assumption that
Einstein's theory was about such a reality made him a little more critical. Details in
Chapter 6 of Elie Zahar, Einstein's Revolution, La Salle, Ill., 1989.

8. Such as the test of the effects of gravity upon light that was carried out in 1919 by
Eddington and Crommelin and evaluated by Eddington. For a colourful description of
the event andits impact, cf.C.M. Will, Was Einstein Right?, New York, 1986, pp. 75ff.

9. Chazy, op. cit, p. 230.

10. Repeating considerations by Newcomb (reported, for example, in Chazy, op.
cit, pp. 204ff), Dicke pointed out that an oblateness of the sun would add classical
terms to Mercury's motion and reduce the excess (compared with NewtonСs theory)
advance of its perihelion. Measurements by Dicke and Goldenberg then found a
difference of 52 km between the equatorial and polar diameter of the sun and a
corresponding reduction of three seconds of arc for Mercury — a sizeable deviation
from the relativistic value. This led to a considerable controversy conceming the
accuracy of the Dicke-Goldenberg experiment and to an increase in the number of
Non-Einsteinian theories of gravitation. Technical details in C.M. Will, Theory and
Experiment in Gravitational Physics, Cambridge, 1981, pp. 176ff, a popular survey
including later developments in Was Einstein Right?, Chapter 5. Note how a new theory
(EinsteinСs theory of gravitation) which is theoretically plausible and well confirmed
Can be endangered by exploiting its Лref utedС predecessor and carrying out appropriate
experiments. Cf. also R.H. Dicke, op. cit.


42 AGAINST METHOD

On the other hand there exist numerous new tests, both inside the
planetary system and outside of it'' that provide confirmations of a
precision unheard of only twenty years ago and unimagined by
Einstein. In most of these cases we are dealing with quantitative
problems which can be resolved by discovering a better set of numbers
but which do not force us to make qualitative adjustments. '2

11. Tests outside the planetary system (cosmology, black holes, pulsars) are
needed to examine alternatives that agree with Einsteinian relativity inside the solar
system. There now exists aconsiderable number of such alternatives and special steps
have been taken to classify them and to elucidate their similarities and differences. Cf.
the introduction to C.M. Will, op. cit.

12. The situation just described shows how silly it would be to approach science
from a naive-falsificationist perspective. Yet this is precisely what some philosophers
have been trying to do. Thus Herbert Feigl (Minnesota Studies, Vol. 5, 1971, p. 7) and
Karl Popper (Objective Knowledge, p. 78) have tried to turn Einstein into a naive
falsificationist. Feigl writes: ЛIf Einstein relied on “beautyФ, “harmonyФ, “symmetryФ,
“eleganceФ in constructing . . . his general theory of relativity, it must nevertheless be
remembered that he also said (in a lecture in Prague in 1920-1 was presentthen as a
very young student): “If the observations of the red shift in the spectra of massive stars
donСt come out quantitatively in accordance with the principles of general relativity,
then my theory will be dust and ashesФ.С Popper writes: ЛEinstein. . . said that ifthe red
shift effect . .. was not observed in the case of white dwarfs, his theory of general
relativity would be refuted.С

Popper gives no source for his story, and he most likely has it from Feigl. But FeiglСs
story and PopperСs repetition conflict with the numerous occasions where Einstein
emphasizes the Лreason of the matterС (Лdie Vernunft der SacheС) over and above
Лverification of little effectsС and this not only in casual remarks during a lecture, but in
writing. Cf. the quotation in footnote 7 above, which deals with difficulties of the
special theory of relativity and precedes the talk at which Feigl was present. Cf. also the
letters to M. Besso and K. Seelig as quoted in G. Holton, ЛInfluences on EinsteinСs
Early WorkС, Organon, No. 3, 1966, p. 242, and K. Selig, Albert Einstein, Zurich,
1960, p. 271. In 1952 Bom wrote to Einstein (Born—Einstein Letters, New York, 1971,
p. 190, dealing with FreundlichСs analysis of the bending oflight near the sun and the
red shift): ЛIt really looks as if your formula is not quite correct. It looks even worse in
the case of the red shift [the crucial case referred to by Feig] and Popper); this is much
smaller than the theoretical value towards the centre of the sunСs disk, and much larger
at the edges. . . . Could this be a hint of non-linearity?Ф Einstein (letter of 12 May 1952,
op.cit., p. 192) replied. ЛFreundlich . ..doesnot move me in the slightest. Even if the
deflection of light, the perihelial movement or line shift were unknown, the gravitation
equations would still be convincing because they avoid the inertial system (the
phantom which affects everything but is not itself affected). /t is really strange that
suman beings are normally deaf to the strongest arguments while they are always inclined to
overestimate measuring accuraciesС (my italics). How is this conflict (between FeiglСs
testimony and EinsteinСs writings) to be explained? It cannot be explained by a change in
EinsteinСs attitude. His disrespectful attitude towards observation and experiment was
there from the very beginning, as we have seen. It might be explained either by a
mistake on FeiglСs part, or else as another instance of EinsteinСs ЛopportunismС - cf.
text to footnote 6 of the /ntroduction..

On the last page (p. 91) of his Uber die Spezielle und allgemeine Relativititstheorie,


FIVE 43
The : and, to my mind, the most important example of an
inconsistency of this kind is ParmenidesС theory of the unchanging
and homogeneous One. This theory illustrates a desire that has
propelled the Western sciences from their inception up to the present
time — the desire to find a unity behind the many events that surround
us. Today the unity sought is a theory rich enough to produce all the
accepted facts and laws; at the time of Parmenides the unity sought
was a substance. Thales had proposed water,'> Heraclitus fire,
Anaximander a substance which he called the apeiron and which
could produce all four elements without being identical with a single
one of them. Parmenides gave what seems to be an obvious and
rather trivial answer: the substance that underlies everything thatis is
Being. But this trivial answer had surprising consequences. For
example, we can assert that (first principle) Being is and that (second
principle) Not Being is not. Now consider change and assume it to be
fundamental. Then change can only go from Being to Not Being. But
according to the second principle Not Being is not, which means that
there is no fundamental change. Next consider difference and
assume it to be fundamental. Then the difference can only be
between Being and Not Being. But (second principle) Not Being is
not and therefore there exist no differences in Being — it is a single,
unchanging, continuous block. Parmenides knew of course that
people, himself included, perceive and accept change and difference;
but as his argument had shown that the perceived processes could
not be fundamental he had to regard them as merely apparent, or
deceptive. This is indeed what he said — thus anticipating all those
scientists who contrasted the ЛrealС world of science with the everyday
world of qualities and emotions, declared the latter to be Лmere
appearanceС and tried to base their arguments on ЛobjectiveС
experiments and mathematics exclusively. He also anticipated a
Brunswick, 1922, Einstein writes: ЛIf the red shift of the spectral lines caused by the
Sravitational potential did not exist, then the general theory of relativity would be
untenable,С Does this conflict with EinsteinСs cavalier attitude towards observation as
described above? It does not. The passage speaks of the red shifi not of observations of it.
13. The following account is highly speculative, Details in Vols 1 and 2 of W.K.C.
Guthrie, 4 History of Greek Philosophy, Cambridge, 1962 and 1965, as well as in
Chapters 1, 2 and 3 of my Farewell to Reason.


44 AGAINST METHOD

popular interpretation of the theory of relativity which sees all events
and transitions as already prearranged in a four-dimensional
continuum, the only change being the (deceptive) journey of
consciousness along its world line.'* Be that as it may, he was the
first to propose a conservation law (Being is), to draw a boundary line
between reality and appearance (and thus to create what later
thinkers called a Лtheory of knowledgeС) and to give a more
satisfactory foundation for continuity than did 19th- and 20thcentury mathematicians who had to invoke ЛintuitionС. Using
ParmenidesС arguments Aristotle constructed a theory of space and
motion that anticipated some very deep-lying properties of quantum
mechanics and evaded the difficulties of the more customary (and
less sophisticated) interpretation of a continuum as consisting of
indivisible elements.'> ParmenidesС theory clashes with most
modern methodological principles — but this is no reason to disregard
it.

A more specific example of a theory with qualitative defects is
NewtonСs theory of colours. According to this theory, lightconsists of
rays of different refrangibility which can be separated, reunited,
refracted, but which are never changed in their internal constitution,
and which have a very small lateral extension in space. Considering
that the surface of mirrors is much rougher than the lateral extension
of the rays, the ray theory is found to be inconsistent with the
existence of mirror images (as is admitted by Newton himself): if light
consists of rays, then a mirror should behave like a rough surface, i.e.
it should look to us like a wall. Newton retained his theory,
eliminating the difficulty with the help of an ad hoc hypothesis: Лthe
reflection of a ray is effected, not by a single point of the reflecting
body, but by some power of the body which is evenly diffused all over
its surfaceС.

14. A vivid description of the Parmenidean flavour of the theory of relativity is
given by H. Weyl, Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science, Princeton, 1949, p.
116. Einstein himself wrote: ЛFor us who are convinced physicists the distinction
between past, present and future has no other meaning than that of an illusion, though
a tenacious one.С Correspondence avec Michele Besso, Paris, 1979, p. 312. Cf. also p. 292.
In aword: the events of a human life are Лillusions, though tenacious onesС.

15. For Aristotle cf. the essay quoted in Chapter 4, footnote 3. Modern attempts to
get continuity out of collections of indivisible elements are reported in A. Gruenbaum,
ЛA Consistent Conception of the Extended Linear Continuum as an Aggregate of
Unextended ElementsС, Philosophy of Science, No. 19, 1952, pp. 283ff. Cf. also W.
Salmon (ed.), ZenoСs Paradoxes, New York, 1970.

16. Sir Isaac Newton, Optics, Book 2, part 3, proposition 8, New York, 1952, p.
266. For a discussion of this aspect of NewtonСs method cf. my essay, ЛClassical
EmpiricismС, Philosophical Papers, Vol. 2, Chapter 2.


FIVE 45

In NewtonСs case the qualitative discrepancy between theory and
fact was removed by an ad hoc hypothesis. In other cases not even this
very flimsy manoeuvre is used: one retains the theory and tries to forget
its shortcomings. An example is the attitude towards KeplerСs rule
according to which an object viewed through a lens is perceived at the
point at which the rays travelling from the lens towards the eye
intersect.'Ф

sen obs __ al oe
= ier
The rule implies that an object situated at the focus will be seen
infinitely far away.

ЛBut on the contrary,С writes Barrow, NewtonСs teacher and
predecessor at Cambridge, commenting on this prediction,'*® Лwe
are assured by experience that [a point situated close to the focus]
appears variously distant, according to the different situations of the
eye. ... And it does almost never seem further off than it would be if
it were beheld with the naked eye; but, on the contrary, it does
sometimes appear much nearer. . . . All which does seem repugnant
to our principles.С ЛBut for me,С Barrow continues, Лneither this nor
any other difficulty shall have so great an influence on me, as to make
me renounce that which I know to be manifestly agreeable to reason.Ф
seen object
in infinity

real
object
at focus

17. Johannes Kepler, Ad Vitellionem Paralipomena, Johannes Kepler, Gesammelte
Werke, Vol. 2, Munich, 1939, p. 72. For a detailed discussion of KeplerСs rule and its
influence see Vasco Ronchi, Optics: The Science of Vision, New York, 1957, Chapters
43ff. Cf. also Chapters 9-1 1 below.

18. Lectiones XVIII Cantabrigiae in Scholio publicis habitae in quibus Opticorum
Phenomenon genuinae Rationes investigantur ac exponentur, London, 1669, p. 125. The
Passage is used by Berkeley in his attack on the traditional, ЛobjectivisticС optics (4n Essay
Towards a New Theory of Vision, Works, Vol. 1, ed. Frazer, London, 1901, pp. 137A).


46 AGAINST METHOD

Thus the classical electrodynamics of Maxwell and Lorentz
implies that the motion of a free particle is self-accelerated.
Considering the self-energy of the electron one obtains divergent
expressions for point-charges while charges of finite extension can be
made to agree with relativity only by adding untestable stresses and
pressures inside the electron.Ф The problem reappears in the
quantum theory, though it is here partially covered up by
ЛrenormalizationС. This procedure consists in crossing out the results
of certain calculations and replacing them by a description of what is
actually observed. Thus one admits, implicitly, that the theory is in
trouble while formulating it in a manner suggesting that a new
principle has been discovered.Ф° Small wonder when philosophically unsophisticated authors get the impression that Лall evidence
points with merciless definiteness in the . . . direction . . . [that] all
the processes involving . .. unknown interactions conform to the
fundamental quantum law.С2!

A striking example of qualitative failure is the status of classical
mechanics and electrodynamics after BoltzmannСs equipartition
theorem. According to this theorem energy is equally distributed
over all degrees of freedom of a (mechanical or electrodynamic)
system. Both atoms (which had to be elastic to rebound from the walls
ofa container and from each other) and the electromagnetic field had
infinitely many degrees of freedom which meant that solids and the

19. Cf. W. Heitler, The Quantum Theory ofRadiation, Oxford, 1954, p. 31.

20. Renormalization has in the meantime become the basis of quantum field
theory and has led to predictions of surprising accuracy (report with literature in A.
Pais, Inward Bound, Oxford, 1986). This shows that a point of view which, looked at
from afar, appears to be hopelessly wrong may contain excellent ingredients and that
its excellence may remain unrevealed to those guided by strict methodological rules.
Always remember that my examples do not criticize science; they criticize those who
want to subject it to their simpleminded rules by showing the disasters such rules
would create. Each of the examples of footnotes 3-17 can be used as a basis for case
studies of the kind to be carried out in Chapters 6-12 (Galileo and the Copernican
Revolution). This shows that the case of Galileo is not Лan exception characterizing the
beginning of the so-called scientific revolutionС (G. Radnitzky, ЛTheorienpluralismus
TheorienmonismusС, in Diemer Meisenheim (ed), Der Methoden- und Theorienpluralismus in den Wissenschaften, 1971, p. 164) but is typical of scientific change at all
times.

21. Rosenfeld in Observation and Interpretation, London, 1957, p. 44.


FIVE 47
electromagnetic fields should have actedas insatiable sinks of energy.
Yet Л[a]s so of ten inthe history of science, the conflict between simple
and generally known facts and current theoretical ideas was
recognized only slowlyС?

Another example of modern physics is quite instructive, for it
might have led to an entirely different development of our knowledge
concerning the microcosm. Ehrenfest proved a theorem according to
which the classical electron theory of Lorentz taken in conjunction
with the equipartition theorem excludes induced magnetism.Ф The
reasoning is exceedingly simple; according to the equipartition
theorem, the probability of a given motion is proportional to exp
(— U/RT), where Uis the energy of the motion. Now the rate of work
of an electron moving in a constant magnetic field B is, according to
Lorentz, W=Q(E+V xB). V, where Q is the charge of the moving
particle, V its velocity and E the electric field. This magnitude
reduces to QEV, which means that the energy and, therefore, the
probability remains unaffected by a magnetic field. (Given the proper
context, this result strongly supports the ideas and experimental
findings of the late Felix Ehrenhaft.)

Occasionally it is impossible to survey all the interesting
consequences, and thus to discover the absurd results of a theory.
This may be due to a deficiency in the existing mathematical
methods; it may also be due to the ignorance of those who defend the
theory. Under such circumstances, the most common procedure is to
use an older theory up to a certain point (which is often quite
arbitrary) and to add the new theory for calculating refinements.
Seen from a methodological point of view the procedure is a veritable
nightmare. Let us explain it using the relativistic calculation of the
path of Mercury as an example.

The perihelion of Mercury moves along at a rate of about 5600Ф
per century. Of this value, 5026Ф are geometric, having to do with the
movement of the reference system, while 531Ф are dynamical, due to
perturbations in the solar system. Of these perturbations all but the

22. K. Gottfried, V.F. Weisskopf, Concepts of Particle Physics, Vol. 1, Oxford and
New York, 1984, p. 6.

23. The difficulty was realized by Bohr in his doctoral thesis, cf. Niels Bohr,
Collected Works, Vol. 1, Amsterdam, 1972, pp. 158, 381. He pointed out that the
velocity changes due to the changes in the external field would equalize after the field
Лwas established, so that no magnetic effects could arise. Cf. also Heilbron and T.S.
Kuhn, ЛThe Genesis of the Bohr AtomС, Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences, No. 1,
1969, p. 221. The argument in the text is taken from The Feynman Lectures, Vol. 2,
California and London, 1965, Chapter 34.6. For a somewhat clearer account cf. R.
Becker, Theorie der Elektrizitat, Leipzig, 1949, p. 132.


48 AGAINST METHOD
famous 43Ф are accounted for by classical mechanics. This is how the
situation is usually explained.

The explanation shows that the premise from which we derive the
43Ф is not the general theory of relativity plus suitable initial
conditions. The premise contains classical physics in addition to
whatever relativistic assumptions are being made. Furthermore, the
relativistic calculation, the so-called ЛSchwarzschild solutionС, does
not deal with the planetary system as it exists in the real world (i.e. our
own asymmetric galaxy); it deals with the entirely fictional case of a
central symmetrical universe containing a singularity in the middle
and nothing else. What are the reasons for employing such an odd
conjunction of premises?

The reason, according to the customary reply, is that we are
dealing with approximations. The formulae of classical physics do
not appear because relativity is incomplete. Nor is the centrally
symmetric case used because relativity does not offer anything better.
Both schemata flow from the general theory under the special
circumstances realized in our planetary system provided we omit
magnitudes too small to be considered. Hence, we are using the
theory of relativity throughout, and we are using it in an adequate
manner.

Now in the present case, making the required approximations
would mean calculating the full n-body problem relativistically
(including long-term resonances between different planetary orbits),
omitting magnitudes smaller than the precision of observation
reached, and showing that the theory thus curtailed coincides with
classical celestial mechanics as corrected by Schwarzschild. This
procedure has not been used by anyone simply because the
relativistic n-body problem has as yet withstood solution. When the
argument started, there were not even approximate solutions for
important problems such as, for example, the problem of stability
(one of the first great stumbling blocks for NewtonСs theory). The
classical part of the explanans, therefore, did not occur just for
convenience, it was absolutely necessary. And the approximations made
were not a result of relativistic calculations, they were introduced in
order to make relativity fit the case. One may properly call them ad hoc
approximations.Ф*

24. Today the so-called parametrized post-Newtonian formalism satisfies most of
the desiderata outlined in the text (details in C.M. Will, Theory). My point is that this
was a later achievement whose absence did not prevent scientists from arguing, and
arguing well, about the new ideas. Theories are not only used as premises for
derivations; they are even more frequently used as a general background for novel


FIVE 49

Ad hoc approximations abound in modern mathematical physics.
They play a very important part in the quantum theory of fields and
they are an essential ingredient of the correspondence principle. At
the moment we are not concerned with the reasons for this fact, we
are only concerned with its consequences: ad hoc approximations
conceal, and even eliminate, qualitative difficulties. They create a
false impression of the excellence of our science. It follows that a
philosopher who wants to study the adequacy of science as a picture
of the world, or who wants to build up a realistic scientific
methodology, must look at modern science with special care. In most
cases modern science is more opaque, and more deceptive, than its
16th- and 17th-century ancestors have ever been.

As a final example of qualitative difficulties | mention again the
heliocentric theory at the time of Galileo. I shall soon have occasion
to show that this theory was inadequate both qualitatively and
quantitatively, and that it was also philosophically absurd.

To sum up this brief and very incomplete list: wherever we look,
whenever we have a little patience and select our evidence in an
unprejudiced manner, we find that theories fail adequately to
reproduce certain quantitative results, and that they are qualitatively
incompetent to a surprising degree. Science gives us theories of great
beauty and sophistication. Modern science has developed mathematical structures which exceed anything that has existed so far in
coherence generality and empirical success. But in order to achieve
this miracle all the existing troubles had to be pushed into the relation
between theory and fact,2> and had to be concealed, by ad hoc
hypotheses, ad hoc approximations and other procedures.
guesses whose formal relation tothe basic assumptions is difficult to ascertain. ЛI must
. . confessС, writes Descartes in his Discourse on Method (Library of Liberal Arts, 1965,
P. 52), Лthat the power of nature is so ample and so vast, and these principles [the
theoretical principles he had developed for his mechanical universe] so simple and so
general, that I almost never notice any particular effectsuch that I donot seerightaway
that it can [be made to conform to these principles] in many different ways; and my
greatest difficulty is usually to discover in which of these ways the effect is derived.С
Modern theoretical physicists find themselves in exactly the same situation.

25. Von NeumannСs work in quantum mechanics is an especially instructive
example of this procedure. In order to arrive at a satisfactory proof of the expansion
theorem in Hilbert Space, von Neumann replaced the quasi- intuitive notions of Dirac
(and Bohr) by more complex notions of his own. The theoretical relations between the
new notions are accessible to a more rigorous treatment than the theoretical relations
between the notions that preceded them (Лmore rigorousС from the point of view of von
Neumann and his followers). It is different with their relation to experimental
Procedures. No measuring instruments can be specified for the great majority of
observables (Wigner, American Journal of Physics, Vol. 31, 1963, p. 14), and where
specification is possible it becomes necessary to modify well-known and unrefuted


50 AGAINST METHOD

This being the case, what shall we make of the methodological
demand that a theory must be judged by experience and must be
rejected if it contradicts accepted basic statements? What attitude
shall we adopt towards the various theories of confirmation and
corroboration, which all rest on the assumption that theories can be
made to agree with the known facts, and which use the amount of
agreement reached as a principle of evaluation? This demand, these
theories, are now all seen to be quite useless. They are as useless as a
medicine that heals a patient only if he is bacteria-free. In practice
they are never obeyed by anyone. Methodologists may point to the
importance of falsifications — but they blithely use falsified theories,
they may sermonize how important it is to consider all the relevant
evidence, and never mention those big and drastic facts which show
that the theories they admire and accept may be as badly off as the
older theories which they reject. In practice they slavishly repeat the
most recent pronouncements of the top dogs in physics, though
in doing so they must violate some very basic rules of their trade.
Is it Possible to proceed in a more reasonable manner? Let us
see!Ф

According to Hume, theories cannot be derwved from facts. The
demand to admit only those theories which follow from facts leaves
us without any theory. Hence, science as we know it can exist only if
we drop the demand and revise our methodology.

According to our present results, hardly any theory is consistent with
the facts. The demand to admit only those theories which are
consistent with the available and accepted facts again leaves us
without any theory. (1 repeat: without any theory, for there is not a
single theory that is not in some trouble or other.) Hence, a science as
we know it can exist only if we drop this demand also and again revise
our methodology, now admitting counterinduction in addition to
admitting unsupported hypotheses. The right method must not contain
laws in an arbitrary way or else to admit that some quite ordinary problems of quantum
mechanics, such as the scattering problem, do not have a solution (J.M. Cook, Journal
of Mathematical Physics, Vol. 36, 1957). Thus thetheory becomes a veritable monster of
rigour and precision while its relation to experience is more obscure than ever. It is
interesting to see that similar developments occur in Лprimitive thoughtС. “The most
striking features of Nupe sand diviningС, writes S.F. Nader in Nupe Religion, 1954,
p. 63, Лis the contrast between its pretentious theoretical framework and its primitive
and slipshod application in practice.С It does not need a science to produce
Neumannian nightmares.

26. The existence of qualitative difficulties, or Лpockets of resistanceС (St
Augustine, Contra Julianum, V, xiv, 51 - Migne, Vol. 44), was used by the Church
fathers to defuse objections which the science of their time had raised against parts of
the Christian faith, such as the doctrine of the corporeal resurrection.


FIVE js
eee
Methodological rules speak of ЛtheoriesС, ЛobservationsС and Лexperimental resultsС as if these were well-defined objects 6
whose properties are easy to evaluate and which are understood in
the same way by all scientists.

However, the material which a scientist actually has at his disposal,
his laws, his experimental results, his mathematical techniques, his
epistemological prejudices, his attitude towards the absurd consequences of the theories which he accepts, is indeterminate in many
ways, ambiguous, and never fully separated from the historical background. It is contaminated by principles which he does not know
and which, if known, would be extremely hard to test. Questionable
views on cognition, such as the view that our senses, used in normal
circumstances, give reliable information about the world, may invade
the observation language itself, constituting the observational terms
as well as the distinction between veridical and illusory appearance.
Asa result, observation languages may become tied to older layers of
speculation which affect, in this roundabout fashion, even the most
progressive methodology. (Example: the absolute space-time frame
of classical physics which was codified and consecrated by Kant.)
The sensory impression, however simple, contains a component that
expresses the physiological reaction of the perceiving organism and
has no objective correlate. This ЛsubjectiveС component often merges
with the rest, and forms an unstructured whole which must be
subdivided from the outside with the help of counterinductive
procedures. (An example is the appearance of a fixed star to the
naked eye, which contains the effects of irradiation diffraction,
diffusion, restricted by the lateral inhibition of adjacent elements of
the retina and is further modified in the brain.) Finally, there are the
auxiliary premises which are needed for the derivation of testable
conclusions, and which occasionally form entire auxiliary sciences.

Consider the case of the Copernican hypothesis, whose invention,
defence, and partial vindication runs counter to almost every
methodological rule one might care to think of today. The auxiliary
sciences here contained laws describing the properties and the
influence of the terrestrial atmosphere (meteorology); optical laws
dealing with the structure of the eye and of telescopes, and with the
behaviour of light; and dynamical laws describing motion in moving
systems. Most importantly, however, the auxiliary sciences contained


52 AGAINST METHOD

a theory of cognition that postulated a certain simple relation
between perceptions and physical objects. Not all auxiliary disciplines were available in explicit form. Many of them merged with
the observation language, and led to the situation described at the
beginning of the preceding paragraph.

Consideration of all these circumstances, of observation terms,
sensory core, auxiliary sciences, background speculation, suggest
that a theory may be inconsistent with the evidence, not because it is
incorrect, but because the evidence is contaminated. The theory is
threatened because the evidence either contains unanalysed sensations which only partly correspond to external processes, or because
it is presented in terms of antiquated views, or because it is evaluated
with the help of backward auxiliary subjects. The Copernican theory
was in trouble for ail these reasons.

It is this historico-physiological character of the evidence, the fact that it
does not merely describe some objective state of affairs but also
expresses subjective, mythical, and long-forgotten views concerning this
state of affairs, that forces us to take a fresh look at methodology. It
shows that it would be extremely imprudent to let the evidence judge
our theories directly and without any further ado. A straightforward
and unqualified judgement of theories by ЛfactsС is bound to eliminate
ideas simply because they do not fit into the framework of some older
cosmology. Taking experimental results and observations for granted
and putting the burden of proof on the theory means taking the
observational ideology for granted without having ever examined it.
(Note that the experimental results are supposed to have been
obtained with the greatest possible care. Hence Лtaking observations,
etc, for grantedС means Лtaking them for granted affer the most
careful examination of their reliabilityС: for even the most careful
examination of an observation statement does not interfere with the
concepts in which it is expressed, or with the structure of the sensory
image.)

Now — how can we possibly examine something we use all the time
and presuppose in every statement? How can we criticize the terms in
which we habitually express our observations? Let us see!

The first step in our criticism of commonly-used concepts is to
create a measure of criticism, something with which these concepts
can be compared. Of course, we shall later want to know a little more
about the measuring-stick itself; for example, we shall want to know
whether it is better than, or perhaps not as good as, the material
examined. But in order for this examination to start there must be a
measuring-stick in the first place. Therefore, the first step in our
criticism of customary concepts and customary reactions is to step


FIVE 53
outside the circle and either to invent a new conceptual system, for
example a new theory, that clashes with the most carefully
established observational results and confounds the most plausible
theoretical principles, or to import such a system from outside
science, from religion, from mythology, from the ideas of incompetents,ФФ or the ramblings of madmen. This step is, again,
counterinductive. Counterinduction is thus both a fact — science
could not exist without it— and a legitimate and much needed movein
the game of science.

27. It is interesting to see that Philolaos, who disregarded the evidence of the
sefses and set the earth in motion, was Лan unmathematical confusionist. It was the
confusionist who found the courage lacking in many great observers and
mathematically well-informed scientists to disregard the immediate evidence of the
senses in order to remain in agreement with principles he firmly believed.С K. von
Fritz, Grundproblemeder Geschichteder antiken Wissenschafi, Berlin-New York, 1971, Pp.
165. ЛIt is therefore not surprising that the next step on this path was due to a man
whose writings, as far as we know them, show him as a talented stylist and popularizer
With occasionally interesting ideas of his own rather than as a profound thinker or exact
Scientist,С ibid,, p. 184. Confusionists and superficial intellectuals mave ahead while the
ЛdeepС thinkers descend into the darker regions of the status quo or, to express it in a
different way, they remain stuck in the mud.


Asan example of such an attempt I examine the tower argument which the
Aristotelians used to refute the motion of the earth. The argument involves
natural interpretations — ideas so closely connected with observations that
it needs a special effort to realize their existence and to determine their
content. Galileo identifies the natural interpretations which are inconsistent
with Copernicus and replaces them by others.

It seems to me that [Galileo] suffers greatly from continual

digressions, and that he does not stop to explain all that is relevant at

each point; which shows that he has not examined them in order, and

that he has merely sought reasons for particular effects, without

having considered ... first causes ...; and thus that he has built

without a foundation.

DESCARTES

I am (indeed) unwilling to compress philosophical doctrines into the

most narrow kind of space and to adopt that stiff, concise and

graceless manner, that manner bare of any adornment which pure

geometricians call their own, not uttering a single word that has not

been given to them by strict necessity . . . I do not regard it as a fault to

talk about many diverse things, even in those treatises which have only

a single topic . . . for I believe that what gives grandeur, nobility, and

excellence to our deeds and inventions does not lie in what is

necessary — though the absence ofit would be a great mistake — but in

what is not... ..

GALILEO

But where common sense believes that rationalizing sophistshave the

intention of shaking the very fundament of the commonweal, then it

would seem to be not only reasonable, but permissible, and even


SIX 5S
praiseworthy to aid the good cause with sham reasons rather than
leaving the advantage to the . . . opponent.

KANT!

As a concrete illustration and as a basis for further dia

According to the argument which convinced Tycho, and which is
used against the motion of the earth in GalileoСs own Trattato della
sfera, observation shows that Лheavy bodies . . . falling down from on
high, go by a straight and vertical line to the surface of the earth. This
is considered an irrefutable argument for the earth being motionless.
For, ifit made the diurnal rotation, a tower from whose top arock was
let fall, being carried by the whirling of the earth, would travel many
hundreds of yards to the east in the time the rock would consume in
its fall, and the rock ought to strike the earth that distance away from
the base of the tower.Ф

|. The three quotations are: Descartes, letter to Mersenne of 11 October 1638,
Ocuores, \1, p. 380. Galileo, letter to Leopold of Toscana of 1640, usually quoted
under the title Sul Candor Lunare, Opere, Favoro, VIII, p. 491. For a detailed discussion
of GalileoСs style and its connection with his natural philosophy cf. L. Olschki, Galileo
und seine Zeit: Geschichte der neusprachlichen wissenschafilichen Literatur, Vol. Ill, Halle,
1927, reprinted Vaduz, 1965. The letter to Leopold is quoted and discussed on
pp. 455ff.

DescartesС letter is discussed by Salmon as an example of the issue between
rationalism and empiricism in “The Foundations of Scientific InferenceС, Mind and
Cosmos, ed. Colodny, Pittsburgh, 1966, p. 136. It should rather be regarded as an
example of the issue between dogmatic methodologies and opportunistic methodologies, bearing in mind that empiricism can be as strict and unyielding as the most
Tigorous types of rationalism.

ЛThe Kant quotation is from the Critique of Pure Reason, B777, 8ff (the quotation was
brought to my attention by Professor Stanley RosenСs work on PlatoСs Symposium).
Kant continues: ЛHowever, 1 would think that there is nothing that goes less well
together with the intention of asserting a good cause than subterfuge, conceit, and
deception. /fone could take only this much for granted, then the battle of speculative
Teason . . . would have been concluded long ago, or would soon come to an end. Thus
the purity of a cause often stands in the inverse proportion tots truth. . . .Ф One should
also note that Kant explains the rise of civilization on the basis of disingenuous moves
which Лhave the function to raise mankind above its crude pastС, ibid., 776, 14f. Similar
ideas occur in his account of world history.

2. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 126.


56 AGAINST METHOD

In considering the argument, Galileo at once admits the
correctness of the sensory content of the observation made, viz. that
Лheavy bodies .. . falling from a height, go perpendicularly to the
surface of the earthС.> Considering an author (Chiaramonti) who
sets out to convert Copernicus by repeatedly mentioning this fact, he
says: ЛI wish that this author would not put himself to such trouble
trying to have us understand from our senses that this motion of
falling bodies is simple straight motion and no other kind, nor get
angry and complain because such a clear, obvious, and manifest thing
should be called into question. For in this way he hints at believing
that to those who say such motion is not straight at all, but rather
circular, it seems they see the stone move visibly in an arc, since he
calls upon their senses rather than their reason to clarify the effect.
This is not the case, Simplicio; for just as 1. . . have never seen nor
ever expect to see, the rock fall any way but perpendicularly, just so
do I believe that it = tothe : of ne oo

The question is answered by an example that occurs in GalileoСs
next paragraph, Лfrom which . . . one may learn how easily anyone
may be deceived by simple appearance, or let us say by the
impressions of oneСs senses. This event is the appearance to those
who travel along a street by night of being followed by the moon, with
steps equal to theirs, when they see it go gliding along the eaves of the
roofs. There it looks to them just as would a cat really running along
the tiles and putting them behind it; an appearance which, if reason
did not intervene, would only too obviously deceive the senses.С

In this example, we are asked to start with a sensory impression and
to consider a statement that is forcefully suggested by it. (The
suggestion is so strong that it has led to entire systems of belief and to
rituals, as becomes clear from a closer study of the lunar aspects of
witchcraft and of other cosmological hypotheses.) Now Лreason
intervenesС; the statement suggested by the impression is examined,
and one considers other statements in its place. The nature of the
impression is not changed a bit by this activity. (This is only
approximately true; but we can omit for our present purpose the
complications arising from an interaction of impression and

3. ibid, p. 125.

4. ibid., p. 256.


SIX 57
proposition.) But it enters new observation statements and plays new,
better or worse, parts in our knowledge. What are the reasons and the
methods which regulate such an exchange?

To start with, we must become clear about the nature of the total
phenomenon: appearance plus statement. There are not two acts —
one, noticing a phenomenon; the other, expressing it with the help of
the appropriate statement — but only one, viz. saying in a certain
observational situation, Лthe moon is following meС, or, Лthe stone is
falling straight downС. We may, of course, abstractly subdivide this
process into parts, and we may also try to create a situation where
statement and phenomenon seem to be psychologically apart and
waiting to be related. (This is rather difficult to achieve and is
perhaps entirely impossible.) But under normal circumstances such a
division does not occur; describing a familiar situation is, for the
speaker, an event in which statement and phenomenon are firmly
glued together.

This unity is the result of a process of learning that starts in oneСs
childhood. From our very early days we learn to react to situations
with the appropriate responses, linguistic or otherwise. The teaching
procedures both shape the ЛappearanceС, or ЛphenomenonС, and
establish a firm connection with words, so that finally the phenomena
seem to speak for themselves without outside help or extraneous
knowledge. They are what the associated statements assert them to
be. The language they ЛspeakС is, of course, influenced by the beliefs
of earlier generations which have been held for so long that they no
longer appear as separate principles, but enter the terms of everyday
discourse, and, after the prescribed training, seem to emerge from
the things themselves.

Atthis point we may want to compare, in our imagination and quite
abstractly, the results of the teaching of different languages
incorporating different ideologies. We may even want consciously to
change some of these ideologies and adapt them to more ЛmodernС
points of view.

Yet, I shall for the moment, remain within these limits.
Making the additional simplifying assumption, we can now
distinguish between sensations and those Лmental operations which


58 AGAINST METHOD

follow so closely upon the sensesС,> and which are so firmly
connected with their reactions that a separation is difficult to achieve.
Considering the origin and the effect of such operations, | shall call
them natural interpretations.

In the history of thought, natural interpretations have been
regarded either as a priori presuppositions of science, or else as
prejudices which must be removed before any serious examination can
begin. The first view is that of Kant, and, in a very different manner
and on the basis of very different talents, that of some contemporary
linguistic philosophers. The second view is due to Bacon (who had
predecessors, however, such as the Greek sceptics).
oa eet
always clear from his writings. Quite the contrary. The methods of
reminiscence, to which he appeals so freely, are designed to create
the impression that nothing has changed and that we continue
expressing our observations in old and familiar ways. Yet his attitude
is relatively easy to ascertain: natural interpretations are necessary.
The senses alone, without the help of reason, cannot give us a true
account of nature. What is needed for arriving at such a true account
are Лthe ... senses, accompanied by reasoning.© Moreover, in the
arguments dealing with the motion of the earth, it is this reasoning, it
is the connotation of the observation terms and not the message of the
senses or the appearance that causes trouble. ЛIt is, therefore, better
to put aside the appearance, on which we all agree, and to use the
power of reason either to confirm its reality or to reveal its fallacy.Ф
Confirming the reality or revealing the fallacy of appearances means,
however, examining the validity of those natural interpretations
which are so intimately connected with the appearances that we no
longer regard them as separate assumptions. I now turn to the first
natural interpretation implicit in the argument from falling stones.

According to the Copernican view as presupposed in the tower
argument the motion of a falling stone should be Лmixed straightand-circularС.® By the Лmotion of the stoneС is meant not its motion
relative to some visible mark in the visual field of the observer, or its

5. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, Introduction.

6. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 255, my italics.

7. ibid., p. 256.

8. ibid., p. 248.


SIX 59
observed motion, but rather its motion in the solar system or in
(absolute) space, i.e. its real motion. The familiar facts appealed to in
the argument present a different kind of motion, a simple vertical
motion. This refutes the Copernican hypothesis only if the concept
of motion that occurs in the observation statement is the same as the
concept of motion that occurs in the Copernican prediction. The
observation statement Лthe stone is falling straight downС must,
therefore, refer to a movement in (absolute) space. It must refer to a
real motion.

Now, the force of an Лargument from observationС derives from the
fact that the observation statements involved are firmly connected
with appearances. There is no use appealing to observation if one
does not know how to describe what one sees, or if one can offer oneСs
description with hesitation only, as if one had just learned the
language in which it is formulated. Producing an observation
statement, then, consists of two very different psychological events:
(1) a clear and unambiguous sensation and (2) a clear and
unambiguous connection between this sensation and parts of a
language. This is the way in which the sensation is made to speak. Do
the sensations in the above argument speak the language of real
motion?

They speak the language of real motion in the context of 17thcentury everyday thought. At least, this is what GalilАo tells us. He
tells us that the everyday thinking of the time assumes the ЛoperativeС
character of all motion, or, to use well-known philosophical terms, it
assumes @ narve realism with respect to motion: except for occasional
and unavoidable illusions, apparent motion is identical with real)
(absoliite) motion) Of course, this distinction is not explicitly drawn.
One does not first distinguish the apparent motion from the real
motion and then connect the two by a correspondence rule. One
rather describes, perceives, acts towards motion as if it were already
the real thing. Nor does one proceed in this manner under all
circumstances. It is admitted that objects may move which are not
seen to move; and it is also admitted that certain motions are illusory
(cf. the example of the moon mentioned earlier in this chapter).
Apparent motion and real motion are not alwaysidentified. However,
there are paradigmatic cases in which it is psychologically very difficult,
if not plainly impossible, to admit deception. It is from these
Paradigmatic cases, and not from the exceptions, that naive realism
with respect to motion derives its strength. These are also the
Situations in which we first learn our kinematic vocabulary. From our
very childhood we learn to react to them with concepts which have
Naive realism built right into them, and which inextricably connect


60 AGAINST METHOD

movement and the appearance of movement. The motion of the
stone in the tower argument, or the alleged motion of the earth, is
such a paradigmatic case. How could one possibly be unaware of the
swift motion of a large bulk of matter such as the earth is supposed to
be! How could one possibly be unaware of the fact that the falling
stone traces a vastly extended trajectory through space! From the
point of view of 17th-century thought and language, the argument is,
therefore, impeccable and quite forceful. However, (notice how
theories (Лoperative characterС of all motion; essential correctness of
sense reports) which are not formulated explicitly, enter the debate in
the guise of observable events. We realize again that such events are
Trojan horses which must be watched most carefully. How is one
supposed to proceed in sucha sticky situation?

The argument from falling stones seems to refute the Copernican
view. This may be due to an inherent disadvantage of Copernicanism,
but it may also be due to the presence of natural interpretations which
are in need of improvement. The first task, then, is to discover and to
isolate these unexamined obstacles to progress.

It was BaconСs belief that natural interpretations could be
discovered by a method of analysis that peels them off, one after
another, until the sensory core of every observation is laid bare. This
method has serious drawbacks. First, natural interpretations of the
kind considered by Bacon are not just added to a previously existing
field of sensations. They are instrumental in constituting the field, as
Bacon says himself. Eliminate all natural interpretations, and you
also eliminate the ability to think and to perceive. Second,
disregarding this fundamental function of natural interpretations, it
should be clear that a person who faces a perceptual field without a
single natural interpretation at his disposal would be completely
disoriented, he could not even start the business of science. The fact
that we do start, even after some Baconian analysis, therefore shows
that the analysis has stopped prematurely. It has stopped at precisely
those natural interpretations of which we are not aware and without
which we cannot proceed. It follows that the intention to start from
scratch, after a complete removal of all natural interpretations, is selfdefeating.

Furthermore, it is not possible even partly to unravel the cluster of
natural interpretations. At first sight the task would seem tobe simple
enough. One takes observation statements, one after the other, and
analyses their content. However, concepts that are hidden in
observation statements are not likely to reveal themselves in the more
abstract parts of language. If they do, it will still be difficult to nail
them down; concepts, just like percepts, are ambiguous and


SIX 61
dependent on background. Moreover, the content of a concept is
determined also by the way in which it is related to perception. Yet,
how can this way be discovered without circularity? Perceptions must
be identified, and the identifying mechanism will contain some of the
very same elements which govern the use of the concept to be
investigated. We never penetrate this concept completely, for we
always use part of it in the attempt to find its constituents. There is
only one way to get out of this circle, and it consists in using an
external measure of comparison, including new ways of relating concepts
and percepts. Removed from the domain of natural discourse and
from all those principles, habits, and attitudes which constitute its
form of life, such an external measure will look strange indeed. This,
however, is not an argumentagainst its use. On the contrary, such an
impression of strangeness reveals that natural interpretations are at
work, and is a first step towards their discovery. Let us explain this
situation with the help of the tower example.

The example is intended toshow that the Copernican view isnotin
accordance with Лthe factsС. Seen from the point of view of these
ЛfactsС, the idea of the motion of the earth is outlandish, absurd, and
obviously false, to mention only some of the expressions which were
frequently used at the time, and which are still heard whenever
professional squares confront a new and counter-factual theory.
This makes us suspect that the Copernican view is an external
measuring rod of precisely the kind described above.

Let us therefore turn the argument around and use it as a detecting
device that helps us to discover the natural interpretations which
exclude the motion of the earth. Turning the argument around, we
Jirst assert the motion of the earth and then inquire what changes will
remove the contradiction. Such an inquiry may take considerable
time, and there is a good sense in which it is not finished even today.
The contradiction may stay with us for decades or even centuries.
Still, it must be upheld until we have finished our examination or else
the examination, the attempt to discover the antediluvian comPonents of our knowledge, cannot even start. This, we have seen, is
one of the reasons one can give for retaining, and, perhaps, even for
inventing, theories which are inconsistent with the facts. Ideological
ingredients of our knowledge and, more especially, of our
observations are discovered with the help of theories which are
refuted by them. They are discovered counterinductively.

Let me repeat what has been asserted so far. Theories are tested,
and possibly refuted, by facts. Facts contain ideological components, oO
older views which have vanished from sight or were perhaps never
formulated in an explicit manner. Such components are highly


62 AGAINST METHOD

suspicious. First, because of their age and obscure origin: we do not
know why and how they were introduced; secondly, because their
very nature protects them, and always has protected them, from
critical examination. In the event of a contradiction between a new
and interesting theory and a collection of firmly established facts, the
best procedure, therefore, is not to abandon the theory but to use it to.
discover the hidden principles responsible for the contradiction.
Counterinduction is an essential part of such a process of discovery.
(Excellent historical example: the arguments against motion and
atomicity of Parmenides and Zeno. Diogenes of Sinope, the Cynic,
took the simple course that would be taken by many contemporary
scientists and all contemporary philosophers: he refuted the
arguments by rising and walking up and down. The opposite course,
recommended here, has led to much more interesting results, as is
witnessed by the history of the case. One should not be too hard on
Diogenes, however, for it is also reported that he beat up a pupil who
was content with his refutation, exclaiming that he had given reasons
which the pupil should not accept without additional reasons of his
own.С)

Having discovered a particular natural interpretation, how can we
examine it and test it? Obviously, we cannot proceed in the usual way,
i.e. derive predictions and compare them with Лresults of observationС. These results are no longer available. The idea that the senses,
employed under normal circumstances, produce correct reports of
real events, for example reports of the real motion of physical bodies,
has been removed from all observational statements. (Remember
that this notion was found to be an essential part of the antiCopernican argument.) But without it our sensory reactions cease to
be relevant for tests. This conclusion was generalized by some older
rationalists, who decided to build their science on reason only and
ascribed to observation a quite insignificant auxiliary function.
Galileo does not adopt this procedure.

If one natural interpretation causes trouble for an attractive view,
and if its elimination removes the view from the domain of
observation, then the only acceptable procedure is to use other
interpretations and to see what happens. The interpretation which
Galileo uses restores the senses to their position as instruments of
exploration, but only with respect to the reality of relative motion. Motion
Лamong things which share it in commonС is Лnon-operativeС, that is,
Лit remains insensible, imperceptible, and without any effect

9. Hegel, Vorlesungen iiber die Geschichte der Philosophie, |, ed. C.L. Michelet,
Berlin, 1840, p. 289.


SIX 63
eae eee
This is, of course, an entirely legitimate move. In general, the
observation language which enters an argument has been in use for a
long time and is quite familiar. Considering the structure of common
idioms on the one hand, and of the Aristotelian philosophy on the
other, neither this use nor this familiarity can be regarded as a test of
the underlying principles. These principles, these natural interpretations, occur in every description. Extraordinary cases which might
create difficulties are defused with the help of Лadjustor wordsС,
such as ЛlikeС or ЛanalogousС, which divert them so that the basic
ontology remains unchallenged. A test is, however, urgently needed.
It is especially needed in those cases where the principles seem to
threaten a new theory. It is then quite reasonable to introduce
alternative observation languages and to compare them both with the
original idiom and with the theory under examination. Proceeding in
10. Dialogue, op. cit. p. 171. GalileoСs kinematic relativism is not consistent. In the
passage quoted, he proposes the view (1) that shared motion has no effect whatsoever.
ЛMotion,С he says, Лin so far as it is and acts as motion, to that extent exists relatively to
things that lack it; and among things which all share equally in any motion, it does not
act and is as if it did not existС (p. 116); ЛWhatever motion comes to be attributed to the
earth must necessarily remain imperceptible . . . so long as we look only at terrestrial
objectsС (p. 114); Л... motion that is common to many moving things is idle and
inconsequential to the relation of those movables among themselves . . .С (p. 116). On
the other hand, (2) he also suggests that Лnothing . . . moves in a straight line by nature.
ЛThe motion of all celestial objects is in a circle; ships, coaches, horses, birds, all move
ina circle around the earth; the motions of the parts of animals are all circular; in sum—
weare forced to assume that only gravia deorsum and levia sursum move apparently ina
straight line; but even that is not certain as long as it has not been proven that the earth
is at restС (p. 19). Now, if (2) is adopted, then the loose parts of systems moving in a
straight line will tend to describe circular paths, thus contradicting (1). It is this
inconsistency which has prompted me to split GalileoСs argument into two steps, one
dealing with the relativity of motion (only relative motion is noticed), the other dealing
with inertial laws (and only inertial motion /eaves the relation between the parts of a system
unaffected — assuming, of course, that neighbouring inertial motions are approximately
Parallel). For the two steps of the argument, see the next chapter. One must also realize
that accepting relativity of motion for inertial paths means giving up the impetus theory,
which provides an (inner) cause for motions and therefore assumes an absolute space
in which this cause becomes manifest. This Galileo seems to have done by now, for his
argument for the existence of ЛboundlessС or ЛperpetualС motions which he outlines on
Pp. 147fF of the Dialogue appeals to motions which are neutral, ie. neither natural nor
forced, and which may therefore (?) be assumed to go on for ever.
11. J.L. Austin, Sense and Sensibilia, New York, 1964, p. 74. Adjustor words play
an important role in the Aristotelian philosophy.


64 AGAINST METHOD

this way, we must make sure that the comparison is fair. That is, we
must not criticize an idiom that is supposed to function as an
observation language because it is not yet well known and is,
therefore, less strongly connected with our sensory reactions and less
plausible than is another, more ЛcommonС idiom. Superficial
criticisms of this kind, which have been elevated into an entire
ЛphilosophyС, abound in discussions of the mind-body problem.
Philosophers who want to introduce and to test new views thus find
themselves faced not with arguments, which they could most likely
answer, but with an impenetrable stone wall of well-entrenched
reactions. This is not at all different from the attitude of people
ignorant of foreign languages, who feel that a certain colour is
much better described by ЛredС than by ЛrossoС. As opposed to such
attempts at conversion by appeal to familiarity (ЛI know what pains
are, and I also know, from introspection, that they have nothing
whatever to do with material processes!С), we must emphasize thatia
comparative judgement of observation languages, e.g. materialistic
observation languages, phenomenalistic observation languages,
objective-idealistic observation languages, theological observation
languages, etc., can start only when all of them are spoken equally
fluently.

Let us now continue with our analysis of GalileoСs reasoning.


The new natural interpretations constitute a new and highly abstract
observation language. They are introduced and concealed so that one fails to
notice the change that has taken place (method of anamnesis). They contain
the idea of the relativity of all motion and the law of circular inertia.
proceed? How does he manage to introduce absurd and counterinductive assertions such as the assertion that the earth moves, and yet
get them a just and attentive hearing? One anticipates that arguments
will not suffice — an interesting and highly important limitation of
rationalism — and GalileoСs utterances are indeed arguments in
appearance only. For

But they
obscure the new attitude towards experience that is in the making,
and postpone for centuries the possibility of a reasonable philosophy.
insinuating that the new results which emerge are known and
conceded by all, and need only be called to our attention to appear as
the most obvious expression of the truth.

Galileo ЛremindsС us that there are situations in which the nonoperative character of shared motion is just as evident and as firmly
believed as the idea of the operative character of all motion is in other
Circumstances. (This latter idea is, therefore, not the only natural
interpretation of motion.) The situations are: events in a boat, in a
smoothly moving carriage, and in other systems that contain an
observer and permit him to carry out some simple operations.

Sagredo: There has just occurred to me a certain fantasy which
passed through my imagination one day while I was sailing to Aleppo,


66 AGAINST METHOD
where I was going as consul for our country. ... If the point of a pen
had been on the ship during my whole voyage from Venice to
Alexandretta and had had the property of leaving visible marks
of its whole trip, what trace - what mark — what line would it have
left?

Simplicio: It would have left a line extending from Venice to there;
not perfectly straight — or rather, not lying in the perfect arc of a circle
— but more or less fluctuating according as the vessel would now and
again have rocked. But this bending in some places a yard or twoto the
right or left, up or down, in length of many hundreds of miles, would
have made little alteration in the whole extent of the line. These would
scarcely be sensible, and, without an error of any moment, it could be
called part of a perfect arc.

Sagredo: So that if the fluctuation of the waves were taken away and
the motion of the vessel were calm and tranquil, the true and precise
motion of that pen would have been an arc of a perfect circle. Now if1
had had that same pencontinually inmy hand, and had moved it only a
little sometimes this way or that, what alterations should I have
brought into the main extent of this line?

Simplicio: Less than that which would be given to a straight line a
thousand yards long which deviated from absolute straightness here
and there by a fleaСs eye.

Sagredo: Then if an artist had begun drawing with that pen on a
sheet of paper when he left the port and had continued doing so all the
way to Alexandretta, he would have been able to derive from the penСs
motion a whole narrative of many figures, completely traced and
sketched in thousands of directions, with landscapes, buildings,
animals, and other things. Yet the actual real essential movement
marked by the pen point would have been only a line; long, indeed,
but very simple. But as to the artistСs own actions, these would
have been conducted exactly the same as if the ship had been
standing still. The reason that of the penСs long motion no trace would
remain except the marks drawn upon the paper is that the gross
motion from Venice to Alexandretta was common to the paper, the
pen, and everything else in the ship. But the small motions back and
forth, to right and left, communicated by the artistСs fingers to the pen
but not to the paper, and belonging to the former alone, could thereby
leave a trace on the paper which remained stationary to those
motions."

1. Dialogue, op. cit., pp. 171.


SEVEN 67
Or

Salviati: ... Imagine yourself in a boat with your eyes fixed on a
point of the sail yard. Do you think that because the boat is moving
along briskly, you will have to move your eyes in order to keep your
vision always on that point of the sail and follow its motion?

Simplicio: | am sure thatI should not need to make any change at all;
Not just as to my vision, but if] had aimed a musket I should never have
to move it a hairsbreadth to keep it aimed, no matter how the boat
moved.

Salviati: And this comes about because the motion which the ship
confers upon the sail yard, it confers also upon you and upon your
eyes, so that you need not move them a bit in order to gaze at the top of
the sail yard, which consequently appears motionless to you. (And the
rays of vision go from the eye to the sail yard just as if a cord were tied
between the two ends of the boat. Now a hundred cords are tied at
different fixed points, each of which keeps its place whether the ship
moves or remains still.)Ф

Itis clear that these situations lead to a non-operative concept of
motion even within common sense.

On the other hand, common sense, and I mean 17th-century
Italian-artisan common sense, also contains the idea of the operative
character of all motion. This latter idea arises when a limited object
that does not contain too many parts moves in vast and stable
surroundings; for example, when a camel trots through the desert, or
when a stone descends from a tower.

Now Galileo urges us to ЛrememberС the conditions in which we
assert the non-operative character of shared motion in this case also,
and to subsume the second case under the first.

Thus, the first of the two paradigms of non-operative motion
mentioned above is followed by the assertion that — ЛIt is likewise true
that the earth being moved, the motion of the stone in descending is
actually a long stretch of many hundred yards, or even many
thousand; and had it been able to mark its course in motionless air or
upon some other surface, it would have left a very long slanting line.
But that part of all this motion which is common to the rock, the
—_____

2. ibid., pp. 2494. That phenomena of seen motion depend on relative motion has
been asserted by Euclid in his Optic, Theon red. par. 49ff. An old scholion of par. 50
uses the example of a boat leaving the harbour: Heiberg, vii, 283. The example is
repeated by Copernicus in Book 1, Chapter viii, of De Revol. It was a commonplace in
mediaeval optics. Cf. Witelo, Perspectiva, iv par 138 (Basel, 1572, p. 180).


68 AGAINST METHOD

tower, and ourselves remains insensible and as if it did not exist.
There remains observable only that part in which neither the tower
Nor we are participants; in a word, that with which the stone, in
falling, measures the tower.Ф

And the second paradigm precedes the exhortation to Лtransfer this
argument to the whirling of the earth and to the rock placed on top of
the tower, whose motion you cannot discern because, in common
with the rock, you possess from the earth that motion which is
required for following the tower; you do not need to move your eyes.
Next, ifyou add to the rock a downward motion whichis peculiar to it
and not shared by you, and which is mixed with this circular motion,
the circular portion of the motion which is common to the stone and
the eye continues to be imperceptible. The straight motion alone is
sensible, for to follow that you must move your eyes downwards.Ф*

This is strong persuasion indeed.

Yielding to this persuasion, we now quite automatically start
confounding the conditions of the two cases and become relativists.
This is the essence of GalileoСs trickery! As a result, the clash
between Copernicus and Лthe conditions affecting ourselves and
those in the air above usФ dissolves into thin air, and we finally
realize Лthat all terrestrial events from which it is ordinarily held that
the earth stands still and the sun and the fixed stars are moving would
necessarily appear just the same to us if the earth moved and the
other stood stillС.®

3. ibid, pp. 172M.

4. ibid, p. 250.

5. Ptolemy, Syntaxis, i, 1, p. 7.

6. Dialogue, op. cit, p. 416: cf. the Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences, transl.
Henry Crew and Alfonso de Salvio, New York, 1958, p. 164: ЛThe same experiment
which at first glance seemed to show one thing, when more carefully examined, assures
us of the contrary.С Professor McMullin, in a critique of this way of seeing things,
wants more Лlogical and biographical justificationС for my assertion that Galileo not
only argued, but also cheated [ЛA Taxonomy of the Relation between History and
Philosophy of ScienceС, Minnesota Studies, Vol. 5, Minneapolis, 1971, p. 39], and he
objects to the way in which I let Galileo introduce dynamical relativism. According to
him Лwhat Galileo argues is that since his opponent already interprets observations
made in such a context [movements on boats] in a “relativisticФ way, how can he
consistently do otherwise in the case of observations made on the earthСs surface?Ф
(ibid., p. 40). This is indeed how Galileo argues. But he argues so against an opponent
who, according to him, Лfeels a great repugnance towards recognizing this nonoperative quality of motion among the things which share it in commonС (Dialogue, op.
cit., p. 171), who is convinced that a boat, apart from having relative motions, has
absolute positions and motions as well (cf. Aristotle, Physics, 208b8ff), and who atany rate
has developed the art of using different notions on different occasions without running
into a contradiction. Now if this is the position to be attacked, then showing that an


SEVEN 69

Letus now look at the situation from a more abstract point of view.
We start with two conceptual sub-systems of ЛordinaryС thought (see
the following table). One of them regards motion as an absolute
process which always has effects, effects on our senses included. The
description of this conceptual system given here may be somewhat
idealized; but the arguments of CopernicusС opponents, which are
quoted by Galileo himself and, according to him, are Лvery
plausibleС, С show that there was a widespread tendency to think in its
terms, and that this tendency was a serious obstacle to the discussion
of alternative ideas. Occasionally, one finds even more primitive ways
of thinking, where concepts such as ЛupС and ЛdownС are used
absolutely. Examples are: the assertion Лthat the earth is too heavy to
climb up over the sun and then fall headlong back down againС,Ф or
the assertion that Лafter a short time the mountains, sinking
downward with the rotation of the terrestrial globe, would get into
such a position that whereas a little earlier one would have had to
climb steeply to their peaks, a few hours later one would have to stoop
and descend in order to get thereС.Ф Galileo, in his marginal notes,
calls these Лutterly childish reasons [which] sufficed to keep imbeciles
believing in the fixity of the earthС!? and he thinks it unnecessary Лto
bother about such men as those, whose name is legion, or to take notice
of their fooleriesС.'' Yet it is clear that the absolute idea of motion
was Лwell-entrenchedС, and that the attempt to replace it was bound to
encounter strong resistance. '*
opponent has a relative idea of motion, or frequently uses the relative idea in his
everyday affairs, is not at all Лproof of inconsistency in his own “paradigmФФ
(McMullin, op. cit., p. 40). It just reveals one part of that paradigm without touching
the other. The argument turns into the desired proof only if the absolute notion is
either suppressed or spirited away, or else identified with the relativistic notion — and
this is what Galileo actually does, though surreptitiously, as 1 have tried to show.

7. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 328.

8. ibid, p. 327.

9. ibid., p. 330.

10. ibid., p. 327.

IL. ibid, p. 327, italics added.
__12. The idea that there is an absolute direction in the universe has a very
interesting history. It rests on the structure of the gravitational field on the surface of
the earth, or of that part of the earth which the observer knows, and generalizes the
experiences made there. The generalization is only rarely regarded as a separate
hypothesis, it rather enters the ЛgrammarС of common sense and gives the terms ЛupС
and ЛdownС an absolute meaning. (This is a Лnatural interpretationС, in precisely the
sense that was explained in the text above.) Lactantius, a Church father of the fourth
century, appeals to this meaning when he asks (Divinae Institutiones, 111, De Falsa
Sapientia): ЛIs one really going to be so confused as to assume the existence of humans
whose feet are above their heads? Where trees and fruit grow not upwards, but


70 AGAINST METHOD

Now, we have seen that this naive realism is on occasions an
essential part of our observational vocabulary. On these occasions
(Paradigm 1), the observation language contains the idea of the
efficacy of all motion. Or, to express it in the material mode of
speech, our experience in these situations is an experience of objects
Paradigm I: Motion of compact Paradigm II: Motion of objects in
objects in stable surroundings of boats, coaches and other
great spatial extension - moving systems.
deer observed by the hunter.
Natural interpretation: Natural interpretation:
All motion is operative. Only relative motion is operative.
Fallingstone Motion ofearth Fallingstone Motion of earth

proves predicts proves predicts

L L 4 J
Earth at rest Oblique motion No relative Norelative
of stone motion between motion between
startingpoint _ starting point
and earth and stone

downwards? The same use of language is presupposed by that Лmass of untutored
menС who raise the question why the antipodeans are not falling off the earth (Pliny,
Natural History, ll, pp. 161-6, cf. also Ptolemy, Syntazis, l, 7). The attempts of Thales,
Anaximenes and Xenophanes to find support for the earth which prevents it from
falling ЛdownС (Aristotle, De Coelo, 294al2ff) shows that almost all early philosophers,
with the sole exception of Anaximander, shared in this way of thinking. (For the
Atomists, who assume that the atoms originally fall Лdown,С cf. Jammer, Concepts of
Space, Cambridge, Mass., 1953, p. 11.) Even Galileo, who thoroughly ridicules the
idea of the falling antipodes (Dialogue, op. cit., p. 331), occasionally speaks of the
Лupper half of the moonС, meaning that part of the moon Лwhich is invisible to usС. And
let us not forget that some linguistic philosophers of today Лwho are too stupid to
recognize their own limitationsС (Galileo, op. cit., p. 327) want to revive the absolute
meaning of Лup-downС at least /ocally. Thus the power over the minds of his
contemporaries ofa primitive conceptual frame, assuming an anisotropic world, which
Galileo had also to fight, must not be underestimated. For an examination of some
aspects of British common sense at the time of Galileo, including astronomical
common sense, see E.M.W. Tillyard, The Elizabethan World Picture, London, 1963.
ЛThe agreement between popular opinion and the centrally symmetric universe is
frequently asserted by Aristotle, e.g. in De Coelo, p. 308a23f.


SEVEN 71
which move absolutely. Taking this into consideration, it is apparent
that GalileoСs proposal amounts to a partial revision of our
observation language or of our experience. An experience which
partly contradicts the idea of the motion of the earth is turned into an
experience that confirms it, at least as far as Лterrestrial thingsС are
concerned.'? This is what actually happens. But Galileo wants to
persuade us that no change has taken place, that the second
conceptual system is already universally known, even though it is not
universally used. Salviati, his representative in the Dialogue, his
opponent Simplicio and Sagredo the intelligent layman all connect
GalileoСs method of argumentation with PlatoСs theory of anamnesis —
aclever tactical move, typically Galilean one is inclined to say. Yet we
must not allow ourselves to be deceived about the revolutionary
development that is actually taking place.

The resistance against the assumption that shared motion is nonoperative was equated with the resistance which forgotten ideas
exhibit towards the attempt to make them known. Let us accept this
interpretation of the resistance! But let us not forget its existence. We
must then admit that it restricts the use of the relativistic ideas,
confining them to part of our everyday experience. Outside this part,
i.e. in interplanetary space, they are ЛforgottenС and therefore not
active. But outside this part there is not complete chaos. Other
concepts are used, among them whose very same absolutistic
concepts which derive from the first paradigm. We not only use them,
we must also admit that they are entirely adequate. No difficulties
arise as long as one remains within the limits of the first paradigm.
ЛExperienceС, i.e. the totality of all facts from all domains, cannot
force us to carry out the change which Galileo wants to introduce.
The motive for a change must come from a different source.

It comes, first, from the desire to see Лthe whole [correspond] to its
parts with wonderful simplicityС,'* as Copernicus had already

13. Dialogue, op. cit, pp. 132 and 416.

14. ibid, p. 341. Galileo quotes here from CopernicusС address to Pope Paul Ill in
De Revolutionibus, cf. also Chapter 10 and the Narratio Prima (quoted from E. Rosen,
Three Copernican Treatises, New York, 1959, p. 165): ЛFor all these phenomena appear
tobe linked most nobly together, as by a golden chain; and each of the planets, by its
Position, and order, and every inequality of its motion, bears witness that the earth
™oves and that we who dwell upon the globe of the earth, instead of accepting its
changes of position, believe that the planets wander in all sorts of motions of their
own.С Note that empirical reasons are absent from the argument and have to be, for
Copernicus himself admits (Commentariolus, op. cit., p. 57) that the Ptolemaic theory is
Лconsistent with the numerical dataС.


72 AGAINST METHOD

expressed himself. It comes from the Лtypically metaphysical urgeС
for unity of understanding and conceptual presentation. And the
motive for a change is connected, secondly, with the intention to
make room from the motion of the earth, which Galileo accepts and is
not prepared to give up. The idea of the motion of the earth is closer
to the first paradigm than to the second, or at least it was at the time of
Galileo. This gave strength to the Aristotelian arguments, and made
them plausible. To eliminate the plausibility, it was necessary to
subsume the first paradigm under the second, and to extend the
relative notions to all phenomena. The idea of anamnesis functions
here as a psychological crutch, as a lever which smooths the process
of subsumption by concealing its existence. As a result we are now
ready to apply the relative notions not only to boats, coaches, birds,
but to the Лsolid and well-established earthС as a whole. And we have
the impression that this readiness was in us all the time, although it
took some effort to make it conscious. This impression is most
certainly erroneous: it is the result of GalileoСs propagandistic
machinations. We would do better to describe the situation in a
different way, as a change of our conceptual system. Or, because we
are dealing with concepts which belong to natural interpretations,
and which are therefore connected with sensations in a very direct
way, we should describe it as a change of experience that allows us to
accommodate the Copernican doctrine. It is this change which
underlies the transition from the Aristotelian point of view to the
epistemology of modern science.

For experience now ceases to be the unchangeable fundament
which it is both in common sense and in the Aristotelian philosophy.
The attempt to support Copernicus makes experience ЛfluidС in the
very same manner in which it makes the heavens fluid, Лso that each
star roves around in it by itself." An empiricist who starts from
experience, and builds on it without ever looking back, now loses the
very ground on which he stands. Neither the earth, Лthe solid, wellestablished earthС, nor the facts on which he usually relies can be
trusted any longer. It is clear that a philosophy that uses such a fluid
and changing experience needs new methodological principles
which do not insist on an asymmetric judgement of theories by
experience. Classical physics intuitively adopts such principles; at least
its great and independent thinkers, such as Newton, Faraday,
Boltzmann proceed in this way. But its official doctrine still clings to
the idea of a stable and unchanging basis. The clash between this

15. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 120.


SEVEN 73
discussion 3 the ae argument is not yet
complete. So far, I have tried to discover what assumption will make a
stone that moves alongside a moving tower appear to fall Лstraight downС,
instead of being seen to move in an arc. The assumption, which I
shall call the relativity principle, that our senses notice only relative
motion and are insensitive to a motion which objects have in common
was seen to do the trick. What remains to be explained is why the stone
Stays with the tower and is not left behind. In order to save the
Copernican view, one must explain not only why a motion that
preserves the relation among visible objects remains unnoticed, but
also, why a common motion of various objects does not affect their
relation. That is, one must explain why such a motion is not a causal
agent. Turning the question around in the manner explained in the
text to foomote 10, page 63 of the last chapter, it is now apparent
that the anti-Copernican argument described there rests on two
natural interpretations: viz, the epistemological assumption that
absolute motion is always noticed, and the dynamical principle that
objects (such as the falling stone) which are not interfered with
assume their natural motion.
This corresponds to our own experience where things
ve to be pushed around to move. The discovery of seeds, bacteria,
viruses would have been impossible without a firm belief in the
qualitative part of the law — and it confirmed it in a most impressive
way. Using this law scientists inferred that a stone dropped from a
tower situated on a moving earth would be left behind. Thus the
relativity principle must be combined with a new law of inertia in such
a fashion that the motion of the earth can still be asserted. One sees at
once that the following law, the principle of circular inertia as I shall call
it, provides the required solution: an object that moves with a given
angular velocity on a frictionless sphere around the centre of the
earth will continue moving with the same angular velocity for ever.
—____
16. ЛClassical EmpiricismС, op. cit.
_!7. This is the general account of motion. In the cosmological account we have
circular motion above and up-and-down motions on earth.


74 AGAINST METHOD

Combining the appearance of the falling stone with the relativity
principle, the principle of circular inertia and some simple
assumptions concerning the composition of velocities, '* we obtain an
argument which no longer endangers CopernicusС view, but can be
used to give it partial support.

The relativity principle was defended in two ways. The first was by
showing how it helps Copernicus: this defence is ad hoc but not
objectionable, because necessary for revealing natural interpretations. The second was by pointing to its function in common sense,
and by surreptitiously generalizing that function (see above). No
independent argument was given for its validity. GalileoСs support for
the principle of circular inertia is of exactly the same kind. He
introduces the principle, again not by reference to experiment or to
independent observation, but by reference to what everyone is
already supposed to know.

Simplicio: So you have not made a hundred tests, or even one? And
yet you so freely declare it to be certain?...
Sabiati: Without experiment, I am sure that the effect will happen

as I tell you, because it must happen that way; and I might add that you

yourself also know that it cannot happen otherwise, no matter how you

may pretend not to know it. ... But | am so handy at picking peopleСs
brains that I shall make you confess this in spite of yourself.'Ф

Step by step, Simplicio is forced to admit that a body that moves,
without friction, on a sphere concentric with the centre of the earth

18. These assumptions were not at all a matter of course, but conflicted with some
very basic ideas of Aristotelian physics. The principle of circular inertia is related to the
impetus theory, but not identical with it. The impetus theory retains the idea that it
needs a force to bring about change, but it puts the force inside the changing object.
Once pushed, an object continues moving in the same way in which a heated object
Лstays warm — both contain the cause of their new state. Galileo modifies this idea in two
ways. First, the circular motion is supposed to go on forever while an object kept
moving by impetus will gradually slow down, just as a heated object, its analogue,
gradually becomes colder. The argument for this modification is given in the text
below; it is purely rhetorical. Secondly, the eternal circular motions must proceed
without a cause: if relative motions are not operative, then introducing a motion with
the same centre and the same angular velocity as a circular motion upheld by impetus
cannot eliminate forces: we are on the way from impetus to momentum (cf. A. Maier,
Die Vorlaufer Galileis im 14. Jahrhundert, Rome, 1949). All these changes are
overlooked by those who assume that the transition was the simple result of a new and
better dynamics and that the dynamics was already available, but had not yet been
applied in a determined way.

19. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 145.


SEVEN 75
will carry out a ЛboundlessС, a ЛperpetualС motion. We know, of
course, especially after the analysis we have just completed of the
non-operative character of shared motion, that what Simplicio
accepts is based neither on experiment nor on corroborated theory. It
is a daring new suggestion involving a tremendous leap of the
imagination.Ф° A little more analysis then shows that this suggestion
is connected with experiments, such as the ЛexperimentsС of the
Discorsi*" by ad hoc hypotheses.

20. For a Copernican the only leap involved was the identification of the earth as a
celestial object. According to Aristotle celestial objects move in circles and Лa body that
moves in a circle has neither heaviness nor lightness for it cannot change its distance
from the centre, neither in a natural nor in a forced wayС. De Coelo, 269b34f.

21. Incidentally, many of the ЛexperiencesС or ЛexperimentsС used in the arguments
about the motion of the earth are entirely fictitious. Thus Galileo, in his Trattato della
ЛSfera (Opere, Vol. II, pp. 21 1ff), which Лfollows the opinion of Aristotle and of PtolemyС
(p. 223), uses this argument against a rotation of the earth: Л.. . objects which one lets
fall from high places to the ground such asa stone from the top of a tower would not fall
towards the foot of that tower; for during the time whichthe stone coming rectilinearly
towards the ground, spends in the air, the earth, escaping it, and moving towards the
east would receive it in a part far removed from the foot of the tower in exactly the same
manner in which a stone that is dropped from the mast of a rapidly moving ship will not fall
towards its foot, but more towards the sternС (p. 224). The italicized reference to the
behaviour of stones on ships is again used in the Dialogue (p. 126), when the Ptolemaic
arguments are discussed, but it is no longer accepted as correct. ЛIt seems to be an
appropriate time,С says Salviati (ibid, p. 180), Лto take notice of a certain generosity on
the part of the Copernicans towards their adversaries when, with perhaps too much
liberality, they concede as true and correct a number of experiments which their
opponents have never made. Such for example is that of the body falling from the mast

a ship while itis in motion. .. .С Earlier, p. 154, itis implied rather than observed, that
the stone will fall to the foot of the mast, even if the ship should be in motion while a
possible experiment is discussed on p. 186. Bruno (La Cena de le Ceneri, Opere Italiane,

ed. Giovanni Gentile, Bari, 1907, p. 83) takes it for granted that the stone will arrive
at the foot of the mast. It should be noted that the problem did not readily lend itself to
an experimental solution. Experiments were made, but their results were far from
conclusive. Cf. A. Armitage, ЛThe Deviation of Falling BodiesС, Annals of Science, 5,
1941-7, pp. 342Af, and A. Koyré, Metaphysics and Measurement, Cambridge, 1968, pp.
899f. The tower argument can be found in Aristotle, De Coelo, 296b22, and Ptolemy,
Syntaxis, i, 8. Copernicus discusses it in the same chapter of De Revol, but tries to
defuse it in the next chapter. Its role in the Middle Ages is described in M. Clagett, The
Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, Madison, 1959, Chapter 10.


76 AGAINST METHOD
(common sense; Speaking paradoxically, but not incorrectly, one may
say that Galileo invents an experience that has metaphysical ingredients. It
is by means of such an experience that the transition from a geostatic
cosmology to the point of view of Copernicus and Kepler is
achieved.Ф?

22. Alan Chalmers, in an interesting and well-argued paper (ЛThe Galileo That
Feyerabend Missed: An Improved Case Against MethodС in J.A. Schuster and R.R.
Yeo (eds), The Politics and Rhetoric of Scientific Method, Dordrecht, 1986, pp. 1ff),
distinguishes Лbetween Galileo's contributions toa new science, on the one hand, and
the question of the social conditions in which that science is developed and practised,
Лon the otherС, admits that ЛpropagandaС (though much less than I suggest) may have
been part of his attempt to change the latter, but emphasizes that it does not affect the
former. ЛThe main source for Galileo's contribution to science itselfС, says Chalmers,
Лis his Two New SciencesС. This is the work I should have studied to explore Galileo's
procedure. Butthe Two New Sciences do not deal with the topic | was discussing, viz. the
transition to Copernicus. Here Galileo used procedures rather different from those of
his later work. Lynn Thorndike, who shares ChalmersС evaluation of the Dialogue,
wished that Galileo had written a systematic textbook on that subject (4 History of
Magic and Experimental Science, Vol. 6, New York, 1941, pp. 7 and 62: ЛGalileo might
have done better to write a systematic textbook than his provocative dialoguesС). Now
for such a textbook to have substance it would have to be as general as its Aristotelian
rival and it would have to show how and why Aristotelian concepts needed to be
replaced at the most elementary level. Aristotelian concepts, though abstract, were
closely related to common sense. Hence it was necessary to replace some common
notions by others (I am now speaking about what Chalmers calls Лperceptual relativityС
=p. 7). Two questions arise: how big were the changes? and was propaganda (rhetoric,
were Лirrational movesС) needed to carry them out? My answer to the latter question is
that discourse attempting to bring about major conceptual changes is a normal part of
science, common sense, and cultural exchange (for the latter cf. Chapter 16 and
Chapter 17, item vi, Лopen exchangeС), and that it differs from the discourse carried out
withina more or less stable framework. Personally, I am quite prepared to make it part
of rationality. But there exist philosophical schools that oppose it or call it incoherent
(cf. Chapter 10 of Farewell to Reason which discusses some of Hilary PutnamСs views).
Using the terminology of these schools | speak of Galileo's ЛtrickeryС, etc. And I add that
science contains ingredients that occasionally need such ЛtrickeryС to become
acceptable. The difference between the Sciences and the Dialogue, therefore, is not
between science and sociology but between technical changes in a narrow field and
basic changes, realistically interpreted. My answer to the first question is that
perceptual relativity, though acknowledged by many scholars (and by Aristotle
himself), was not a common possession (Galileo points out that even some of his fellow
scientists stumbled at this point) and thus had to be argued for. This is not at all
surprising, as my discussion of qualitative difficulties in Chapter 5 shows. Besides, is it
really true that a traveller on a boat sees the harbour as receding as if itwere removed


In addition to natural interpretations, Galileo also changes sensations that
seem to endanger Copernicus. He admits that there are such sensations, he
praises Copernicus for having disregarded them, he claims to have removed
them with the help of the telescope. However, he offers no theoretical
reasons why the telescope should be expected to give a true picture of the sky.
I repeat and summarize. An argument is proposed that refutes
Copernicus by observation. The argument is inverted in order to
discover the natural interpretations which are responsible for the
contradiction. The offensive interpretations are replaced by others,
propaganda and appeal to distant, and highly theoretical, parts of
common sense are used to defuse old habits and to enthrone new
ones. The new natural interpretations, which are also formulated
explicitly, as auxiliary hypotheses, are established partly by the
support they give to Copernicus and partly by plausibility considerations and ad hoc hypotheses. An entirely new ЛexperienceС arises in
this way. There is as yet no independent evidence, but this is no
drawback; it takes time to assemble facts that favour a new
cosmology. For what is needed is a new dynamics that explains both
celestial and terrestrial motions, a theory of solid objects, aerodynamics, and all these sciences are still hidden in the future.! But
their task is now well-defined, for GalileoСs assumptions, his ad hoc
hypotheses included, are sufficiently clear and simple to prescribe
the direction of future research.

Let it be noted, incidentally, that GalileoСs procedure drastically
reduces the content of dynamics. Aristotelian dynamics was a general

1. GalileoСs circular law is not the right dynamics. It fits neither the epicycles
which still occur in Copernicus, nor KeplerСs ellipses. In fact, itis refuted by both. Still,
Galileo regards it as an essential ingredient of the Copernican point of view andtriesto
remove bodies, such as comets, whose motion quite obviously is not circular, from
interplanetary space. In his AssayerЛGalileo talked about comets [and interpreted them
as illusions, similar to rainbows] in order to protect the Copernican system from
Possible falsifications.С P. Redondi, Galileo Heretic, Princeton, 1987, pp. 145, 31.


7 AGAINST METHOD
theory of change, comprising locomotion, qualitative change,
generation and corruption, and it could also be applied to mental
processes. GalileoСs dynamics and its successors deal with locomotion
only, and here again just with the locomotion of matter. Other
kinds of motion are pushed aside with the promissory note (due to
Democritos) that locomotion will eventually be capable of explaining
all motion. Thus a comprehensive empirical theory is replaced by a
narrow theory plus a metaphysics of motion,Ф just as an ЛempiricalС
experience is replaced by an experience that contains speculative
elements. Counterinduction, however, is now seen to play an important
role both vis-a-vis theories and vis-a-vis facts. It clearly aids the
advancement of science. This concludes the considerations begun in
Chapter 6.

Replying to an interlocutor who expressed his astonishment at the

2. The so-called scientific revolution led to astounding discoveries and
considerably extended our knowledge of physics, physiology, and astronomy. This was
achieved by pushing aside and regarding as irrelevant, and often as non-existent, those
facts which had supported the older philosophy. Thus the evidence for witchcraft,
demonic possession, the existence of the devil, etc., was disregarded together with the
ЛsuperstitionsС it once confirmed. The result was that Лtowards the close of the Middle
Ages science was forced away from human psychology, so that even the great
endeavour of Erasmus and his friend Vives, as the best representatives of humanism,
did not suffice to bring about a reapproachment, and psychopathology had to trail
centuries behind the developmental trend of general medicine and surgery. As a
matter of fact ... the divorcement of medical science from psychopathology was so
definite that the latter was always totally relegated to the domain of theology and
ecclesiastic and civil law — two fields which naturally became further and further
removed from medicine...С G. Zilboorg, MD, The Medical Man and the Witch,
Baltimore, 1935, pp. 34 and 70ff. Astronomy advanced, but the knowledge of the
human mind slipped back into an earlier and more primitive stage. Another example is
astrology. ЛIn the early stages of the human mind,С writes A. Comte (Cours de
Philosophie Positive, Vol. Ill, pp. 273-80, ed. Littré, Paris, 1836), Лthese connecting
links between astronomy and biology were studied from a very diff erent point of view,
but at least they were studied and not left out of sight, as is the common tendency in our
own time, under the restricting influence of a nascent and incomplete positivism.
Beneath the chimerical belief of the old philosophy in the physiological influence of
the stars, there lay a strong, though confused recognition of the truth that the facts of
life were in some way dependent on the solar system. Like all primitive inspirations of
manСs intelligence this feeling needed rectification by positive science, but not
destruction; though unhappily in science, as in politics, it is often hard to reorganize
without some brief period of overthrow.С A third area is mathematics. Aristotle had
developed a highly sophisticated theory of the continuum that overcame the
difficulties raised by Zeno and anticipated quantum theoretical ideas on motion (see
foomote 15 and text of Chapter 5). Most physicists returned to the idea of acontinuum
consisting of indivisible elements — if they considered such recondite matters, that is.


EIGHT 79
small number of Copernicans, Salviati, who Лact[s] the part of
CopernicusС, gives the following explanation: ЛYou wonder that
there are so few followers of the Pythagorean opinion [that the earth
moves] while I am astonished that there have been any up to this day
who have embraced and followed it. Nor can | ever sufficiently
admire the outstanding acumen of those who have taken hold of this
opinion and accepted it as true: they have, through sheer force of
intellect, done such violence to their own senses as to prefer what
reason told them over that which sensible experience plainly showed
them to be the contrary. For the arguments against the whirling [the
rotation] of the earth we have already examined [the dynamical
arguments discussed above] are very plausible, as we have seen; and
the fact that the Ptolemaics and the Aristotelians and all their
disciples took them to be conclusive is indeed a strong argument of
their effectiveness. But the experiences which overtly contradict
the annual movement [the movement of the earth around the sun] are
indeed so much greater in their apparent force that, I repeat,
there is no limit to my astonishment when I reflect that Aristarchus
and Copernicus were able to make reason so conquer sense that,
in defiance of the latter, the former became mistress of their belief.Ф

A little later Galileo notes that Лthey [the Copernicans] were
confident of what their reason told them!Ф And he concludes his
brief account of the origins of Copernicanism by saying that Лwith
reason as his guide he [Copernicus] resolutely continued to affirm
what sensible experience seemed to contradictС. ЛI cannot get over
my amazementС, Galileo repeats, Лthat he was constantly willing to
persist in saying that Venus might go around the sun and might
be more than six times as far from us at one time as at another,
and still look always equal, when it should have appeared forty times
larger.Ф

The Лexperiences which overtly contradict the annual movementС,
and which Лare much greater in their apparent forceС than even the
dynamical arguments above, consist in the fact that ЛMars, when it is
close to us . .. would have to look sixty times as large as when it is most
distant. Yet no such difference is to be seen. Rather, when it is in
opposition to the sun and close to us it shows itself only four or five

3. Dialogue, op. cit., pp. 131 and 256.

4. ibid, p. 328. At other times Galileo speaks much more belligerently and
dogmatically, and apparently without any awareness of the difficulties mentioned here.
Gi is Preparatory notes for the letter to Grand Duchess Christina, Opere, V, pp.

S. ibid., p. 335.

6. ibid, p. 339.


80 AGAINST METHOD
times as large as when, at conjunction, it becomes hidden behind the
rays of the sun.СФ

ЛAnother and greater difficulty is made for us by Venus which, if it
circulates around the sun, as Copernicus says, would now be beyond
it and now on this side of it, receding from and approaching towards
us by as much as the diameter of the circle it describes. Then, when it
is beneath the sun and very close to us, its disc ought to appear to us a
little less than forty times as large as when it is beyond the sun and
near conjunction. Yet the difference is almost imperceptible.С

In an earlier essay, The Assayer, Galileo expressed himself still
more bluntly. Replying to an adversary who had raised the issue of
Copernicanism he remarks that Лneither Tycho, nor other astronomers
nor even Copernicus could clearly refute [Ptolemy] inasmuch as a most
important argument taken from the movement of Mars and Venus
stood always in their wayС. (This ЛargumentС is mentioned again in the
Dialogue, and has just been quoted.) He concludes that Лthe two
systemsС (the Copernican and the Ptolemaic) are Лsurely falseС.®

We see that Galileo's view of the origin of Copernicanism differs
markedly from the more familiar historical accounts. He

7. ibid., p. 334.

8. TheAssayer, quoted from The Controversy on the Comets of 1918, op.cit., p. 185.

9. This refers tothe period before the end of the 1 6th century; cf. DerekJ.deS. Price,
ЛContra-Copernicus: A Critical Re-Estimation of the Mathematical Planetary Theory
ofPtolemy, Copernicus and KeplerС, in M. Clagett (ed.), Critical Problems intheHistory of
Science, Madison, 1959, pp. 197-218. Price deals only with the kinematic and the optical
difficulties of the new views. (A consideration of the dynamical difficulties would further
strengthen his case.) He points out that Лunder the best conditions a geostatic or
heliostatic system using eccentric circles (ortheirequivalents) with central epicycles can
account forall angular motions of the planets to an accuracy better than 6С . . .excepting
only the special theory needed to account for... Mercury and excepting also the planet
Mars which shows deviations up to 30' from a theory. [This is] certainly better than the
accuracy of | 0С which Copernicus himself stated as a satisfactory goal for his own theoryС
which was difficult to test, especially in view of the fact that refraction (almost 1° on the
horizon) was not taken into accountat the time of Copernicus, and that the observational
basis of the predictions was less than satisfactory.

Carl Schumacher (Untersuchungen iiber die ptolemdische Theorie der unteren Planeten,
Miinster, 1917) has found that the predictions concerning Mercury and Venus made
by Ptolemy differ at most by an amount of 30С from those of Copernicus. The
deviations found between modern predictions and those of Ptolemy (and Copernicus),


EIGHT él
such tremendous difficulties. He praises them for having proceeded
counterinductively.

This, however, is not yet the whole story.

For while it might be conceded that Copernicus acted simply on
faith, it may also be said that Galileo found himself in an entirely
different position. Galileo, after all, invented a new dynamics. And he
invented the telescope. The new dynamics, one might want to point
out, removes the inconsistency between the motion of the earth and
the Лconditions affecting ourselves and those inthe airabove usС.!°And
the telescope removes the Лeven more glaringС clash between the
changes in the apparent brightness of Marsand Venus as predicted on
the basis of the Copernican scheme and as seen with the naked eye.
This, incidentally, is also GalileoСs own view. He admits that Лwere it
not for the existence of a superior and better sense than natural and
common sense to join forces with reasonС he would have been Лmuch
more recalcitrant towards the Copernican systemС.! The Лsuperior
and better senseС is, of course, the telescope, and one is inclined to
remark that the apparently counterinductive procedure was as a
matter of fact induction (or conjecture plus refutation plus new
conjecture), but one based on a better experience, containing not only
better natural interpretations but also a better sensory core than was
available to GalileoСs Aristotelian predecessors.'* This matter must
now be examined in some detail.

The telescope is a Лsuperior and better senseС that gives new and
more reliable evidence for judging astronomical matters. How is this
hypothesis examined, and what arguments are presented in its favour?

In the Sidereus Nuncius,' the publication which contains his first
which in the case of Mercury may be as large as 7°, are due mainly to wrong constants
and initial conditions, including an incorrect value of the constant of precession. For
the versatility of the Ptolemaic scheme cf. N.R. Ilanson, /sis, No. 51, 1960, pp. 150-8.

10. Ptolemy, Syntaxis, i, 7.

IL. Dialogue, op. cit, p. 328.

12. For this view cf. Ludovico Geymonat, Galileo Galilei, transl. Stillman Drake,
New York, 1965 (first Italian edition 1957), p. 184. For the story of GalileoСs invention
and use of the telescope cf. R.S. Westfall, ЛScience and PatronageС, /sis, Vol. 76 1985,
Pp. I1ff. According to Westfall, Galileo Лsaw the telescope more as an instrument of
patronage than as an instrument of astronomyС (p. 26) andhad tobe pushed into some
astronomical applications by his pupil (and staunch Copernican) Castelli. GalileoСs
telescopes were better than others in circulation at the time and were much in demand.
But he first satisfied the demands of potential patrons. Kepler, who complained about
the quality of telescopes (cf. next chapter, footnote 21 and text) and who would have
loved to possess a better instrument, had to wait.

13. The Sidereal Messenger of Galileo Galilel, transl. E. St Carlos, London, 1880,
reissued by Dawsons of Pall Mall, 1960, p. 10.


82 AGAINST METHOD

telescopic observations, and which was also the first important
contribution to his fame, Galileo writes that he Лsucceeded (in
building the telescope) through a deep study of the theory of
refractionС. This suggests that he had theoretical reasons for preferring
the results of telescopic observations to observations with the naked
eye. But the particular reason he gives — his insight into the theory of
refraction — is not correct and is not oe either.

In a letter to Giuliano de Medici of 1 October 1610,"* more than
half a year after publication of the Sidereus Nuncius, he asks for a copy
of KeplerСs Optics of 1604,!° pointing out that he had not yet been
able to obtain it in Italy. Jean Tarde, who in 1614 asked Galileo about
the construction of telescopes of pre-assigned magnification, reports
in his diary that Galileo regarded the matter as a difficult one that he
had found KeplerСs Optic of 1611'° so obscure Лthat perhaps its own
author had not understood itС.'Ф In a letter to Liceti, written two
years before his death, Galileo remarks that as far as he was
concerned the nature of light was still in darkness.'® Even if we
consider such utterances with the care that is needed in the case of a
whimsical author like Galileo, we must yet admit that his knowledge
of optics was inferior by far to that of Kepler.'® This is also the

14. Galileo, Opere, Vol. X, p. 441.

15. Ad Vitellionem Paralipomena quibus Astronomiae Pars Optica Traditur, Frankfurt,
1604, to be quoted from Johannes Kepler, Gesammelte Werke, Vol. II, Munich, 1939, ed.
Franz Hammer. This particular work will be referred toas the Лoptics of 1604С. It was
the only useful optics that existed at the time. The reason for GalileoСs curiosity was most
likely the many references to this work in KeplerСs reply to the Sidereus Nuncius. For
the history of this reply as well as a translation cf. Kepler's Conversation with Galileo's
Sidereal Messenger, transl. E. Rosen, New York, 1965. The many references to earlier
work contained in the Conversation were interpreted by some of Galileo's enemies as a
sign that Лhis mask had been torn from his faceС (G. Fugger to Kepler, 28 May 1610,
Galileo, Opere, Vol. X, p. 361) and that he (Kepler) Лhad well plucked himС, Maestlin to
Kepler, 7 August (Galileo, Opere, Vol. X, p. 428). Galileo must have received KeplerСs
Conversation before 7 May (Opere, X, p. 349) and he acknowledges receipt of the
printed Conversation in a letter to Kepler of 19 August (Opere, X, p. 421).

16. Diopirice, Augsburg, 1611, Werke, Vol. IV, Munich, 1941. This work was
written after GalileoСs discoveries. KeplerСs reference to them in the preface has been.
translated by E. St Carlos, op. cit, pp. 37, 79. The problem referred to by Tarde is
treated in KeplerСs Dioptrice.

17. Geymonat, op. cit., p. 37.

18. Letter to Liceti of 23 June 1640. Opere, VIII, p. 208.

19. Kepler, the most knowledgeable and most lovable of GalileoСs contemporaries, gives a clear account of the reasons why, despite his superior knowledge of


EIGHT. 83
conclusion of Professor E. Hoppe, who sums up the situation as
follows:

GalileoСs assertion that having heard of the Dutch telescope he

reconstructed the apparatus by mathematical calculation must of

course be understood with a grain of salt; for in his writings we do not

find any calculations and the report, by letter, which he gives of his

first effort says that no better lenses had been available; six days later

we find him on the way to Venice with a better piece to hand it as a gift

to the Doge Leonardi Donati. This does not look like calculation; it

rather looks like trial and error. The calculation may well have been of

a different kind, and here it succeeded, for on 25 August 1609 his

salary was increased by a factor of three.Ф°

Trial and error — this means that Лin the case of the telescope it was
experience and not mathematics that led Galileo toa serene faith in the
reliability of his deviceС.! This second hypothesis on the origin of
the telescope is also supported by GalileoСs testimony, in which he
writes that he had tested the telescope Лa hundred thousand times on
a hundred thousand stars and other objectsС. Such tests produced
great and surprising successes. The contemporary literature —
letters, books, gossip columns — testifies to the extraordinary
impression which the telescope made as a means of improving
terrestrial vision.
optical matters, he Лrefrained from attempting to construct the deviceС. ЛYou, however,С
he addresses Galileo, Лdeserve my praise. Putting aside all misgivings you turned
directly to visual experimentationС (Conversation, op. cit., p. 18). It remains to add that
Galileo, due to his lack of knowledge in optics, had no ЛmisgivingsС to overcome:
ЛGalileo . . . was totally ignorant of the science of optics, and it is not too bold to assume
that this was a most happy accident both for him and for humanity at largeС, Ronchi,
ЛScientific Change, ed. Crombie, London, 1963, p. 550.

20. Die Geschichte der Optik, Leipzig, 1926, p. 32. HoppeСs judgement concerning
the invention of the telescope is shared by Wolf, Zinner and others. Huyghens points
out that superhuman intelligence would have been needed to invent the telescope on
the basis of the available physics and geometry. After all, says he, we still do not
understand the workings of the telescope. (ЛDioptricaС, Hugenii Opuscula Postuma,
Ludg. Bat. 1903, 163, paraphrased after A.G. Kastner, Geschichte der Mathematik,
Vol. IV, Gttingen, 1800, p. 60.)

21. Geymonat, op. cit. p. 39.

22. Letter to Carioso, 24 May 1616, Opere, X, p. 357: letter to P. Dini, 12 May
1611, Opere, IX, p. 106: ЛNor can it be doubted that I, over a period of twoyears now,
have tested my instrument (or rather dozens of my instruments) on hundreds and
thousands of objects near and far, large and small, bright and dark; hence | do not see
howit can enter the mind of anyone that I have simple-mindedly remained deceived in
my observations.С The hundreds and thousands of experiments remind one of
Hooke, and are most likely equally spurious. Cf. footnote 9 of Chapter 9.


84 AGAINST METHOD

Julius Caesar Lagalla, Professor of Philosophy in Rome, describes
a meeting of 16 April 1611, at which Galileo demonstrated his
device: ЛWe were on top of the Janiculum, near the city gate named
after the Holy Ghost, where once is said to have stood the villa
of the poet Martial, now the property of the Most Reverend Malvasia.
By means of this instrument, we saw the palace of the most illustrious Duke Altemps on the Tuscan Hills so distinctly that we
readily counted its each and every window, even the smallest;
and the distance is sixteen Italian miles. From the same place
we read the letters on the gallery, which Sixtus erected in the Lateran
for the benedictions, so clearly, that we distinguished even the
periods carved between the letters, at a distance of at least two

“tag 223
miles.

Other reports confirm this and similar events. Galileo himself
points to the Лnumber and importance of the benefits which the
instrument may be expected to confer, when used by land or seaС.?*

23. Legalla, De phaenomenis in orbe lunae novi telescopii usa a D. Galileo Galilei nunc
iterum suscitatis physica disputatio (Venice, 1612), p. 8; quoted from E. Rosen, The
Naming of the Telescope, New York, 1947, pl. 54. The regular reports (Avvisi) of the
Duchy of Urbino on events and gossip in Rome contain the following notice of the
event: ЛGalileo Galilei the mathematician, arrived here from Florence before Easter.
Formerly a Professor at Padua, he is at present retained by the Grand Duke of
Tuscany at a salary of 1,000 scudi. He has observed the motion of the stars with the
occiali, which he invented or rather improved. Against the opinion of all ancient
philosophers, he declares that there are four more stars or planets, which are satellites
of Jupiter and which he calls the Medicean bodies, as well as two companions of
Saturn. He has here discussed this opinion of his with Father Clavius, the Jesuit.
ЛThursday evening, at Monsignor MalavasiaСs estate outside the St Pancratius gate, a
high and open place, a banquet was given for him by Frederick Cesi, the marquis of
Monticelli and nephew of Cardinal Cesi, who was accompanied by his kinsman, Paul
Monaldesco. In the gathering there were Galileo; a Fleming named Terrentius;
Persio, of Cardinal CesiСs retinue, La] Galla, Professor at the University here; the
Greek, who is Cardinal GonzagaСs mathematician; Piffari, Professor at Siena, and as
many as eight others. Some of them went out expressly to perform this observation,
and even though they stayed until one oСclock in the morning, they still did not reach an
agreement in their viewsС (quoted from Rosen, op. cit., p. 31).

24. Sidereal Messenger, op. cit., p. ii. According to Berellus (De Vero Telescopii
Inventore, Hague, 1655, p. 4), Prince Moritz immediately realized the military value of
the telescope and ordered that its invention - which Berellus attributes to Zacharias
Jansen — be kept a secret. Thus the telescope seems to have commenced as a secret
weapon and was tumed to astronomical use only later. There are many anticipations of
the telescope to be found in the literature, but they mostly belong to the domain of
natural magic and are used accordingly. An example is Agrippa von Nettesheim, who,
inhis book on occult philosophy (written 1509, Book II, chapter 23), writes Лet ego novi
ex illis miranda conficere, et specula in quibus quis videre poterit quaecunque voluerit
a longissima distantiaС. ЛSo may the toy of one age come to be the precious treasure of
anotherС, Henry Morley, The Life of Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim, Vol. Il, p. 166.


EIGHT 85
The terrestrial success of the telescope was, therefore, assured.
Its application to the stars, however, was an entirely different
matter.


Nor does the initial experience with the telescope provide such reasons. The
first telescopic observations of the sky are indistinct, indeterminate,
contradictory and in conflict with what everyone can see with his unaided
eyes. And the only theory that could have helped to separate telescopic
illusions from veridical phenomena was refuted by simple tests.

ca ee
the result of an interaction of light (which connects both domains
and has special properties) with terrestrial objects cannot, without
further discussion, be extended to the sky. To this physical idea
one added, entirely in accordance with the Aristotelian theory
of knowledge (and also with present views about the matter), the
idea that the senses are acquainted with the close appearance of
terrestrial objects and are, therefore, able to perceive them distinctly,
even if the telescopic image should be vastly distorted, or disfigured

1. This is hardly ever realized by those who argue (with Kastner, op. cit,, p. 133)
that Лone does not see how a telescope can be good and useful on the earth and yet
deceive in the skyС. KastnerСs comment is directed against Horky. See below, text to
foomotes 9-16 of the present chapter.

2. That the senses are acquainted with our everyday surroundings, but are liable
to give misleading reports about objects outside this domain, is proved at once by
the appearance of the moon. On the earth large but distant objects in familiar surroundings, such as mountains, are seen as being large, and far away. The appearance
of the moon, however, gives us an entirely false idea of its distance and its
size.


NINE 87
itself. Moreover, all the familiar cues (such as background, overlap,
knowledge of nearby size, etc.), which constitute and aid our vision
on the surface of the earth, are absent when we are dealing with the
: so that new and = = are bound to occur. :
We shall soon have occasion to comment on the theories that were
available at the time and we shall see that they were unfit for the task
and were refuted by plain and obvious facts. For the moment, I want
to stay with the observations themselves and I want to comment on
the contradictions and difficulties which arise when one tries to take
the celestial results of the telescope at their face value, as indicating
stable, objective properties of the things seen.

Some of these difficulties already announce themselves in a report
of the contemporary Avvisi® which ends with the remark that Лeven
though they (the participants in the gathering described) went out
expressly to perform this observation (of “four more stars or planets,
which are satellites of Jupiter ... as well as of two companions of
SaturnФС), and even though they stayed until one in the morning,
they still did not reach an agreement in their views.Ф

3. It is not too difficult to separate the letters of a familiar alphabet from a
background of unfamiliar lines, even if they should happen to have been written with
an almost illegible hand. No such separationis possible with letters which belong to an
unfamiliar alphabet. The parts of such letters do not hang together to form distinct
patterns which stand out from the background of general (optical) noise (in the manner
described by K. Koffka, Psychol. Bull., 19, 1922, pp. 5SIff, partly reprinted in M.D.
Vernon (ed.), Experiments in Visual Perception, London, 1966; cf. also the article by
Gottschaldt in the same volume).

4. For the importance of cues such as diaphragms, crossed wires, background,
etc., in the localization and shape of the telescope image and the strange situations
arising when no cues are present cf. Chapter IV of Ronchi, Optics, op. cit., especially
pp. 151, 174, 189, 191, etc. Cf. also R.L. Gregory, Eye and Brain, New York, 1966,
passim and p. 99 (on the autokinetic phenomenon). FP. Kilpatrick (ed.), Explorations in
Transactional Psychology, New York, 1961, contains ample material on what happens in
the absence of familiar cues.

5. Itis for this reason thatthe Лdeep study of the theory of refractionС which Galileo
Pretended tohave carried out (text to footnote 13 of Chapter 8) would have been quite
insufficient for establishing the usefulness of the telescope; cf. also footnote 16 of the
Present chapter.

6. Details in Chapter 8, footnote 23.

7. This is how the ring of Saturn was seen at the time. Cf. also R.L. Gregory, The
Intelligent Eye, p. \N9.


88 AGAINST METHOD

Another meeting that became notorious all over Europe makes the
situation even clearer. About a year earlier, on 24 and 25 April 1610,
Galileo had taken his telescope to the house of his opponent, Magini,
in Bologna to demonstrate it to twenty-four professors of all faculties.
Horky, KeplerСs overly-excited pupil, wrote on this occasion;® ЛI never
slept on the 24th or 25th April, day or night, but! tested the instrument
of GalileoСs in a thousand ways,Ф both on things here below and on
those above. Below it works wonderfully; in the heavens it deceives one,
as some fixed stars [Spica Virginis, for example, is mentioned, as well
as a terrestrial flame] are seen double.'° I have as witnesses most
excellent men and noble doctors ... and all have admitted the
instrument to deceive. ... This silenced Galileo and on the 26th he
sadly left quite early in the morning . .. not even thanking Magini for
his splendid meal. .. .С Magini wrote to Kepler on 26 May: ЛHe has
achieved nothing, for more thantwenty learned men were present; yet
nobody has seen the new planets distinctly (nemo perfecte vidit); he
will hardly be able to keep them.Ф A few months later (in a letter
signed by Ruffini) he repeats: ЛOnly some with sharp vision were
convinced to some extent.С'? After these and other negative reports
had reached Kepler from all sides, like a paper avalanche, he asked
Galileo for witnesses:' ЛI do not want to hide it from you that quite a
few Italians have sentletters to Prague asserting that they could not see
those stars [the moons of Jupiter] with your own telescope. I ask myself
how itcan be thatso many deny the phenomenon, including those who
use a telescope. Now, if I consider what occasionally happens to me,
then I do notat all regard it as impossible that a single person may see
what thousands are unable to sec....'* Yet I regret that the

8. Galileo, Opere, Vol. X, p. 342 (my italics, referring to the difference commented
upon above, between celestial and terrestrial observations).

9. The ЛhundredsС and ЛthousandsС of observations, trials, etc., which we find here
again are hardly more than a rhetorical flourish (corresponding to our ЛI have told youa
thousand timesС). They cannot be used toinfer a life of incessant observation.

10. Here again we have a case where external clues are missing. Cf. Ronchi,
Optics, op. cit., as regards the appearance of flames, small lights, etc.

11. Letter of 26 May, Opere, III.

12. ibid, p.196.

13. Letter of 9 August 1610, quoted from Caspar-Dyck, Johannes Kepler in Seinen
Briefen, Vol. 1, Munich, 1930, p. 349.

14. Kepler, who suffered from Polyopia (Лinstead of a single small objectat a great
distance, two or three are seen by those who suffer from this defect. Hence, instead of
a single moon ten or more present themselves to meС, Conversation, op. cit., footnote
94; cf. also the remainder of the foomote for further quotations), and who was familiar
with PlatterСs anatomical investigations (cf. S.L. Polyak, The Retina, Chicago, 1942,
pp. 134ff for details and literature), was well aware of the need for a physiological
criticism of astronomical observations.


NINE 89
confirmation by others should take so long in turning up....
Therefore, I beseech you, Galileo, give me witnesses as soon as
possible. ...С Galileo, in his reply of 19 August, refers to himself, to
the Duke of Toscana, and Giuliano de Medici Лas well as many others
in Pisa, Florence, Bologna, Venice and Padua, who, however, remain
silent and hesitate. Most of them are entirely unable to distinguish
Jupiter, or Mars, or even the Moon as a planet....С!5 — not a very
reassuring state of affairs, to say the least.

Today we understand a little better why the direct appeal to
telescopic vision was bound to lead to disappointment, especially in
the initial stages. The main reason, one already foreseen by Aristotle,
was that the senses applied under abnormal conditions are liable to
give an abnormal response. Some of the older historians had an
inkling of the situation, but they speak negatively, they try to explain
the absence of satisfactory observational reports, the poverty of what is
seen in the telescope.'° They are unaware of the possibility that the
observers might have been disturbed by strong positive illusions also.
The extent of such illusions was not realized until quite recently,
mainly as the result of the work of Ronchi and his school.!Ф Here
sizeable variations are reported in the placement of the telescopic
image and, correspondingly, in the observed magnification. Some
observers put the image right inside the telescope making it change

15. Caspar-Dyck, op. cit, p. 352.

16. Thus Emil Wohlwill, Galileo und sein Kamp ffiir die Kopernikanische Lehre, Vol.
1, Hamburg, 1909, p. 288, writes: ЛNo doubt the unpleasant results were due to the
lack of training in telescopic observation, and the restricted field of vision of the
Galilean telescope as well as tothe absence of any possibility for changing the distance
of the glasses in order to make them fit the peculiarities of the eyes of the learned
men...Ф A similar judgement, though more dramatically expressed, is found in Arthur
KoestlerСs Sleep walkers, p. 369.

17. Cf. Ronchi, Optics, op. cit.: Histoire de la Lumiére, Paris, 1956; Storia del
Cannochiale, Vatican City, 1964; Critica dei Fondamenti dellС Acustica e delСOntica, Rome,
1964; cf. also E. CantoreСs summary in Archives d'histoire des sciences, December 1966,
pp. 333ff. I would like to acknowledge at this place that Professor RonchiСs
investigations have greatly influenced my thinking on scientific method. For a brief
historical account of Galileo's work cf. RonchiСs article in A.C. Crombie (ed.),
Scientific Change, London, 1963, pp. 542-61. How little this field is explored becomes
clear from S. TolanskyСs book Optical Illusions, London, 1964. Tolansky is a physicist
who in his microscopic research (on crystals and metals) was distracted by one optical
illusion after another. He writes: ЛThis turned our interest to the analysis of other
situations, with the ultimate unexpected discovery that optical illusions can, and do,
Play a very real part in affecting many daily scientific observations. This warned me to
be on the lookout and as a result | met more illusions than I had bargained for.С The
Л“llustons of direct visionС, whose role in scientific researchis slowly being rediscovered
Were well known to mediaeval writers on optics, who treated them in special chapters
Of their textbooks. Moreover, they treated lens-images as psychological phenomena, as


90 AGAINST METHOD

its lateral position with the lateral position of the eye, exactly as would
be the case with an after image, or a reflex inside the telescope — an
excellent proof that one must be dealing with an ЛillusionС.'® Others
place the image in a manner that leads to no magnification at all,
although a linear magnification of over thirty may have been

O19 . . .

promised.Ф Even a doubling of images can be explained as the
result of a lack of proper focusing.Ф° Adding the many imperfections
of the contemporary telescopes to these psychological difficulties,Ф!
one can well understand the scarcity of satisfactory reports and one is
rather astonished at the speed with which the reality of the new
phenomena was accepted, and, as was the custom, publicly
acknowledged.Ф* This development becomes even more puzzling
results of a misapprehension, for an image Лis merely the appearance of an object
outside its placeС as we read in John Pecham (cf. David Lindberg, ЛThe “Perspectiva
CommunisФ of John PechamС, Archives Internationales d'histoire des sciences, 1965, p. 51,
as well as the last paragraph of Proposition ii/19 of PechamСs Perspectiva Communis,
which is to be found in John Pecham and the Science of Optic, D. Lindberg (ed.),
Madison, 1970, p. 171).

18. Ronchi, Optics, op. cit., p. 189. This may explain the frequently uttered desire
to look inside the telescope. No such problems arise in the case of terrestrial objects
whose images are regularly placed Лin the plane of the objectС (ibid., p. 182).

19. Forthe magnification of GalileoСs telescope cf. The Sidereal Messenger, op. cit.,
p. 11, cf.also A. Sonnefeld, ЛDie Optischen Daten der Himmelsfernrohre von Galileo
GalilieС, Jenaer Rundschau, Vol. 7, 1962, pp. 207ff. The old rule Лthat the size, position
and arrangement according to which a thing is seen depends on the size of the angle
through which it is seenС (R. Grosseteste, De /ride, quoted from Crombie, Robert
Grosseteste, Oxford, 1953, p. 120), which goes back to Euclid, is almost alpays wrong. 1
still remember my disappointment when, having built a reflector with an alleged linear
magnification of about 150, | found that the moon was only about five times enlarged,
and situated quite close to the ocular (1937).

20. The image remains sharp and unchanged over a considerable interval - the
lack of focusing may show itself in a doubling, however.

21. The first usable telescope which Kepler received from Elector Ernst of Kéin
(who in turn had received it from Galileo), and on which he based his Narratio de
observatis a se quartuor ovis satellibus, Frankfurt, 1611, showed the stars as squares and
intensely coloured (Ges. Werke, IV, p. 461). Ernst von Kéln himself was unable to see
anything with the telescope and he asked Clavius to send him a better instrument
(Archivio della Pontifica Universita Gregoriana, 530, f 182r). Francesco Fontana, who
from 1643 onwards observed the phases of Venus, notes an unevenness of the
boundary (and infers mountains), cf. R. Wolf, Geschichte der Astronomie, Munich, 1877,
p. 398. Forthe idiosyncrasies of contemporary telescopes and descriptive literature cf.
Emst Zinner, Deutsche und Niederlindische Astronomische Instrumente des 11 bis 18.
Jahrhunderts, Munich, 1956, pp. 216-21. Refer also to the author catalogue in the
second part of the book.

22. Father Clavius (letter of 17 December 1610, Opere, X, p. 485), the astronomer
of the powerful Jesuit Collegium Romanum, praises Galileo as the first to have
observed the moons of Jupiter and he recognizes their reality. Magini, Grienberger,
and others soon followed suit. It is clear that, in doing so, they did not proceed


NINE 91
when we consider that many reports of even the best observers were
either plainly false, and capable of being shown as such at the time, or
else self-contradictory.

Thus Galileo reports unevenness, Лvast protuberances, deep

chasms, and sinuositiesС~С at the inner boundary of the lighted part
of the moon while the outer boundary Лappear[s] not uneven, rugged,
and irregular, but perfectly round and circular, as sharply defined as
ifmarked out with a pair of compasses, and without the indentations
of any protuberances and cavitiesС.Ф* The moon, then, seemed to be
according to the methods prescribed by their own philosophy, or else they were very
lax in the investigation of the matter. Professor McMullin (op. cit., footnote 32) makes
much of this quick acceptance of GalileoСs telescopic observations: ЛThe regular
periods observed for the satellites and for the phases of Venus strongly indicated that
they were not artefacts of physiology or optics. There was surely no need for “auxiliary
sciencesФ. ..СЛThere was no need for auxiliary sciences,С writes McMullin, while using
himself the unexamined auxiliary hypothesis that astronomical events are distinguished from physiological events by their regularity and their intersubjectivity. But
this hypothesis is false, as is shown by the moon illusion, the phenomenon of fata
morgana, the rainbow, haloes, by the many microscopic illusions which are so vividly
described by Tolansky, by the phenomena of witchcraft which survive in our textbooks
of psychology and psychiatry, though under a different name, and by numerous other
phenomena. The hypothesis was also known 10 be false by Pecham, Witelo, and other
mediaeval scholars who had studied the regular and intersubjective ЛillusionsС created
by lenses, mirrors, and other optical contrivances. In antiquity the falsehood of
McMullinСs hypothesis was commonplace. Galileo explicitly discusses and repudiates it
in his book on comets. ThusС
P-- G Later on the same problem returned in a
different form when the attempt to determine the velocity of light with more than one
moon led to conflicting results. This was found by Cassini shortly after RoemerСs
discovery — cf. 1.B. Cohen, ЛRoemer and the first determination of the velocity of light
(1676)С, Isis, Vol. 31 (1940), pp. 347ff. For the attitude of Clavius and the scientists of
the Collegium Romanumcf. the very interesting book Galileo in China by Pasquale M.
d'Elia, S. J., Cambridge, Mass., 1960. The early observations ofthe astronomers of the
Collegium are contained in their own ЛNuncius SidereusС, Opere, III/1, pp. 291-8.

23. The Sidereal Messenger, op.cit., p. 8.

24. op. cit, p. 24. - cf. the drawing on page 97 which is taken from Galileo's
Publication. Kepler in his Optics of 1604 writes (on the basis of observations with the
unaided eye): ЛIt seemed as though something was missing in the circularity of the
outmost peripheryС (Werke, Vol. Il, p. 219). He returns to this assertion in his
Conversation (op. cit., pp. 28ff), criticizing Galileo's telescopic results by what he
himself had seen with the unaided eye: ЛYou ask why the moonСsoutermostcircle does
not also appear irregular. I do not know how carefully you have thought about this
subject or whether your query, as is more likely, is based on popular impression. For in


92 AGAINST METHOD

full of mountains at the inside but perfectly smooth at the periphery,
and this despite the fact that the periphery changed as the result of the
slight libration of the lunar body.Ф (The moon and some of the
planets, such as for example Jupiter, were enlarged while the
apparent diameter of the fixed stars decreased: the former were
brought nearer whereas the latter were pushed away. ЛThe stars,С
writes Galileo, Лfixed as well as erratic, when seen with the telescope,
by no means appear to be increased in magnitude in the same
proportion as other objects, and the Moon itself, gain increase of size;
but in the case of the stars such increase appears much less, so that
you may consider that a telescope, which (for the sake of illustration)
is powerful enough to magnify other objects a hundred times, will
scarcely render the stars magnified four or five times.СФ°

my book [the Optics of 1604] I state that there was surely some imperfection in that
outermost circle during full moon. Study the matter, and once again tell us, how it
looks to you. ...С Here the results of naked eye observation are quoted against GalileoСs
telescopic reports — and with perfectly good reason, as we shall see below. The reader
who remembers KeplerСs polyopia (cf. foomote 14 to this chapter) may wonder how he
could trust his senses to such an extent. The reply is contained in the following
quotation (Werke, II, pp. 194ff): ЛWhen eclipses of the moon begin, I, who suffer from
this defect, become aware of the eclipse before all the other observers. Long before the
eclipse starts, I even detect the direction from which the shadow is approaching, while
the others, who have very acute vision, are still in doubt. ... The afore-mentioned
waviness of the moon [cf. the previous quotation] stops for me when the moon
approaches the shadow, and the strongest part of the sunСs rays is cut off... ? Galileo
has two explanations for the contradictory appearance of the moon. The one involves a
lunar atmosphere (Messenger, op. cit., pp. 26ff). The other explanation (ibid., pp. 25ff),
which involves the tangential appearance of series of mountains lying behind each
other, is not really very plausible as the distribution of mountains near the visible side
of the lunar globe does not show the arrangement that would be needed (this is now
even better established by the publication of the Russian moon photograph of 7
October 1959; cf. Zdenek Kopal, An Introduction to the Study of the Moon, North
Holland, 1966, p. 242).

25. The librations were noticed by Galileo. C.G. Righini, ЛNew Light on GalileoСs
Lunar ObservationsС, in M.L Righini-Bonelli and R. Shea (eds), Reason, Experience
and Mysticism in the Scientific Revolution, New York, 1975, pp. 59ff. Thus it was not
sloppiness of observations but the phenomena themselves that misguided Galileo.

In two letters to the journal Science (2 May and 10 October 1980) T.H. Whitaker
accused me of giving a misleading account of GalileoСs observational skill— I called him
a poor observer when his lunar observations were in fact rather impressive. The
accusation is refuted by the text to footnotes 29 and 30 and by foomote 46 of the
present chapter. Whitaker obviously thought my quotations from Wolf (text to
footnote 28) reflected my own opinion. He also points out that the copperplates of
GalileoСs observations are much better, from a modern point of view, than the
woodcuts which accompanied the Nuncius. This is true but does not invalidate my
description of the debate which was based on the published account.

26. Messenger, op. cit., p. 38; cf.also the more detailed account in Dialogue, op. cit,
pp. 336ff. ЛThe telescope, as it were, removes the heavens from us,С writes A. Chwalina


NINE 93
The strangest features of the early history of the telescope emerge,
however, when we take a closer look at GalileoСs pictures of the moon.
It needs only a brief look at GalileoСs drawings, and a photograph
of similar phases, to convince the reader that Лnone of the features
recorded . . . can be safely identified with any known markings of the
lunar landscapeС.ФФ Looking at such evidence it is very easy to think
that ЛGalileo was not a great astronomical observer; or else that the
excitement of so many telescopic discoveries made by him at that
time had temporarily blurred his skill or critical senseС. 8

Now this assertion may well be true (though I rather doubt it in
view of the quite extraordinary observational skill which Galileo
exhibits on other occasions).“Ф But it is poor in content and,
in his edition of Kleomedes, Die Kreisbewegung der Gestirne (Leipzig, 1927, p. 90),
commenting on the decrease of the apparent diameter of ail stars with the sole
exception ofthe sun and the moon. Later on, the different magnification of planets (or
comets) and fixed stars was used as a means of distinguishing them. ЛFrom experience,
I knowС, writes Herschel in the paper reporting his first observation of Uranus (Phil
Trans., 71, 1781, pp. 493f1— the planet is here identified as a comet), Лthat the diameters
of the fixed stars are not proportionally magnified with higher powers, as the planets
are; therefore, | now put on the powers of 460 and 932, and found the diameter of the
comet increased in proportion to the power, as it ought to be. ...С It is noteworthy that
the rule did not invariably apply to the telescopes in use at GalileoСs time. Thus,
commenting on a comet of November 1618, Horatio Grassi (СOn the Three Comets of
1618Ф, in The Controversy ofthe Comets of 1618, op. cit., p. 17) points out Лthat when the
comet was observed through a telescope it suffered scarcely any enlargementС, and he
infers, perfectly in accordance with HerschelСs ЛexperienceС, that Лit will have to be said
that it is more remote from us than the moon. ...С In his Astronomical Balance (ibid., p.
80) he repeats that, according to the common experience of Лillustrious astronomersС
from Лmany parts of EuropeС the comet observed with a very extended telescope
received scarcely any increment... Galileo (ibid. p. 177) accepts this as a fact,
criticizing only the conclusions which Grassi wants to draw from it. All these
phenomena refute GalileoСs assertion (Assayer, op. cit. p. 204) that the telescope
Лworks always in the same wayС. They also undermine his theory of irradiation (cf.
foomote 56 to this chapter).

27. Kopal, op. cit., p. 207.

28. R. Wolf (Geschichte der Astronomie, p. 396) remarks on the poor quality of
Galileo's drawings of the moon (Л.. .seine Abbildung des Mondeskann man... kaum
.-- eine Karte nennenС), while Zinner (Geschichte der Sternkunde, Berlin, 1931, p. 473)
calls GalileoСs observations of the moon and Venus Лtypical for the observations of a
beginnerС. His picture of the moon, according to Zinner, Лhas no similarity with the
moonС (ibid., p. 472). Zinner also mentions the much better quality of the almost
simultaneous observations made by the Jesuits (ibid., p. 473), and he finally asks
whether GalileoСs observations of the moon and Venus were not the result of a fertile
brain, rather than of a careful eye (Лsollte dabei ... der Wunsch der Vater der
Beobachtung gewesen seinФ) — a pertinent question, especially in view of the
Phenomena briefly described in footnote 34 to this chapter.

29. The discovery and identification of the moons of Jupiter were no mean achieve-
™ents, especially as a useful stable support forthe telescope had notyet been developed.


94 AGAINST METHOD

I submit, not very interesting. No new suggestions emerge for
additional research, and the possibility of a test is rather remote.?°
There are, however, other hypotheses which do lead to new
suggestions and which show us how complex the situation was at
the time of Galileo. Let us consider the following two.

Hypothesis I. Galileo recorded faithfully what he saw and in
this way left us evidence of the shortcomings of the first telescopes as well as of the peculiarities of contemporary telescopic
vision. Interpreted in this way GalileoСs drawings are reports
of exactly the same kind as are the reports emerging from

4 Л 3|
the experiments of Stratton, Ehrismann, and KohlerС — except
that the characteristics of the physical apparatus and the unfamiliarity of the objects seen must be taken into account too.>?
We must also remember the many conflicting views which were
held about the surface of the moon, even at GalileoСs time,
and which may have influenced what observers saw.>* What would
be needed in order to shed more light on the matter is an empirical collection of all the early telescopic results, preferably
in parallel columns, including whatever pictorial representations

30. The reason, among other things, is the great variation of telescopic vision from
Лone observer to the next, cf. Ronchi, Optic, op. cit., Chapter IV.

31. For a survey and some introductory literature cf. Gregory, op. cit., Chapter II.
For a more detailed discussion and literature cf. K.W. Smith and W.M. Smith,
Perception and Motion, Philadelphia, 1962, reprinted in part in M.D. Vernon, op. cit.
The reader should also consult AmesС article ЛAniseikonic GlassesС, Explorations in
Transactional Psychology, which deals with the change of normal vision caused by only
slightly abnormal optical conditions. A comprehensive accounts given by L Rock, The
Nature of Perceptual Adaptation, New York, 1966.

32. Many of the old instruments, and excellent descriptions of them, are still
available. Cf. Zinner, Deutsche und Niederlandische astronomische Instrumente.

33. For interesting information the reader should consult the relevant passages of
Kepler's Conversation as well as of his Somnium (the latter is now available in a new
translation by E. Rosen, who has added a considerable amount of background
material: Kepler's Somnium, ed. Rosen, Madison, 1967). The standard work for the
beliefs of the time is still PlutarchСs Face on the Moon (it will be quoted from H.
ChernissС translation of Moralia XII, London, 1967).

34. ЛOne describes the moon after objects one thinks one can perceive on its
surfaceС (Kastner, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 167, commenting on FontanaСs observational
reports of 1646). ЛMaestlin even saw rain on the moonС (Kepler, Conversation, op. cit,
pp. 29f, presenting MaestlinСs own observational report); cf. also da Vinci, notebooks,
quoted from J.P. Richter, The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci, Vol. Il, New York, 1970,
p. 167: ЛIfyou keep the details of the spots of the moon under observation you willl often,
find greatvariation in them, and this I myself have proved by drawing them. And this is
caused by the clouds that rise from the waters in the moon. .. .С For the instability of the
images of unknown objects and their dependence on belief (or ЛknowledgeС) cf.
Ronchi, Optia, op. cit., Chapter IV.


NINE 95
have survived.°° Subtracting instrumental peculiarities, such a
collection adds fascinating material to a yet-to-be-written history of
perception (and of science).*© This is the content of Hypothesis I.

Hypothesis II is more specific than Hypothesis I, and developsitin
acertain direction. I have been considering it, with varying degrees of
enthusiasm, for the last two or three years and my interest in it has
been revived by a letter from Professor Stephen Toulmin, to whom I
am grateful for his clear and simple presentation of the view. It seems
to me, however, that the hypothesis is confronted by many difficulties
and : = be :

That the appearance of the stars, and of the moon, may at some
time have been much more indefinite than it is today was originally
suggested to me by the existence of various theories about the moon
which are incompatible with what everyone can plainly see with his
own eyes. AnaximanderСs theory of partial stoppage (which aimed to
explain the phases of the moon), XenophanesС belief in the existence
of different suns and different moons for different zones of the earth,
HeraclitusС assumption that eclipses and phases are caused by the
turning of the basins, which for him represented the sun and the
moonСС — all these views run counter to the existence of a stable and
plainly visible surface, a ЛfaceС such as we ЛknowС the moon to possess.
The same is true of the theory of Berossos which occurs as late as
Lucretius*® and, even later, in Alhazen.

35. Chapter 15 of Kopal, op. cit. contains an interesting collection of exactly this
kind. Wider scope has W. Schulz, Die Anschauung vom Monde und seinen Gestalten in
Mythos und Kunst der Volker, Berlin, 1912.

36. One must, of course, also investigate the dependence of what is seen on the
current methods of pictorial representation. Outside astronomy this was done by E.
Gombrich, Art and Illusion, London, 1960, and L. Choulant,A History and Bibliography
of Anatomical Illustration, New York, 1945 (translated, with additions, by Singer and
others), who deals with anatomy. Astronomy has the advantage that one side of the
Puzzle, viz. the stars, is fairly simple in structure (much simpler than the uterus, for
example) and relatively well known; of. also Chapter 16 below.

37. For these theories and further literature cf. J.L.D. Dreyer, A History of
Astronomy from Thales to Kepler, New York, 1953.

38. For Berossos, cf. ToulminСs article in /sis, No. 38, 1967, p. 65. Lucretius
writes (On the Nature of Things, transl. Leonard, New York, 1957, p. 216): ЛAgain, she


96 AGAINST METHOD

Now such disregard for phenomena which for us are quite obvious
may be due either to a certain indifference towards the existing
evidence, which was, however, as clear and as detailed as it is today, or
else to a difference in the evidence itself. It is not easy to choose between.
these alternatives. Having been influenced by Wittgenstein, Hanson,
and others, I was for some time inclined towards the second version,
but it now seems to me that it is ruled out both by physiology
(psychology)? and by historical information. We need only
remember how Copernicus disregarded the difficulties arising from
the variations in the brightness of Mars and Venus, which were well
known at the time. And as regards the face of the moon, we see
that Aristotle refers to it quite clearly when observing that Лthe stars
do not roll. For rolling involves rotation: but the “faceФ, as it is called,
of the moon is always seen.*! We may infer, then, that the
occasional disregard for the stability of the face was due not toa lack
of clear impressions, but to some widely held views about the
unreliability of the senses. The inference is supported by PlutarchСs
discussion of the matter which plainly deals not with what is seen
(except as evidence for or against certain views) but with certain
explanations of phenomena otherwise assumed to be well known:** ЛTo
begin with,С he says, Лit is absurd to call the figure seen in the moon an
affection of vision . . . a condition which we call bedazzlement (glare).
Anyone who asserts this does not observe that this phenomenon
should rather have occurred in relation to the sun, since the sun lights
upon us keen and violent, and moreover does not explain why dull
and weak eyes discern no distinction of shape in the moon but her orb
for them has an even and full light whereas those of keen and robust
may revolve upon herself / like toa ballСs sphere — if perchance to be — / one half of her
dyed o'er with glowing light / and by the revolution of that sphere / she may beget for
us her varying shapes / until she turns that fiery part of her / full to the sight and open
eyes of men...Ф

39. Cf. text to foomotes SOM of my ЛReply to CriticismС, op. cit., p. 246.

40. In antiquity the differences in the magnitudes of Venus and Mars were
regarded as being Лobvious to our eyesС, Simplicius, De Coelo, Il, 12, Heiberg, p. 504.
Polemarchus here considers the difficulties of EudoxosС theory of homocentric
spheres, viz. that Venus and Mars Лappear in the midst of the retrograde movement
many times brighter, so that [Venus] on moonless nights causes bodies to throw
shadowsС (objection of Autolycus) and he may well be appealing to the possibility of a
deception of the senses (which was frequently discussed by ancient schools). Aristotle,
who must have been familiar with all these facts, does not mention them anywhere in
De Coelo or in the Metaphysics, though he gives an account of EudoxosС system and of
the improvements of Polemarchus and Kalippus. Cf. footnote 7 of Chapter 8.

41. De Coelo, 290a25ft.

42. op. cit., p. 37, cf. also S. Sambursky, The Physical World of the Greeks, New
York, 1962, pp. 244ff.


NINE 97
~
AAYQX\|AQGG | \&Qagqy =
SARC
FIGURE 1. The shape of a lunar mountain and a walled plain, from Galileo
ЛSidereus Nuncius, Venice, 1610 (cf. p. 111).


98 AGAINST METHOD

vision make out more precisely and distinctly the pattern of facial
features and more clearly perceive the variations.С “The unevenness
also entirely refutes the hypothesis,С Plutarch continues, * Лfor the
shadow that one sees is not continuous and confused, but is not badly
depictured by the words of Agesianax: “She gleams with fire
encircled, but within / Bluer than lapis show a maidenСs eye / And
dainty brow, a visage manifest.Ф In truth, the dark patches submerge
beneath the bright ones which they encompass ... and they are
thoroughly entwined with each other so as to make the delineation of
the figure resemble a painting.С Later on the stability of the face is
used as an argument against theories which regard the moon as being
made of fire, or air, for Лair is tenuous and without configuration, and
so it naturally slips and does not stay in placeС.** The appearance of
the moon, then, seemed to be a well-known and _ distinct
phenomenon. What was in question was the relevance of the
phenomenon for astronomical theory.

We can safely assume that the same was true at the time of
Galileo.*°

But then we must admit that Galileo's observations could be checked with
the naked eye and could in this way be exposed as illusory.

Thus the circular monster below the centre of the disk of the
moon* jis well above the threshold of naked eye observation (its

43. ibid., cf. however, footnote 17 to this chapter, PlinyСs remark (Hist. Nat., II, 43,
46) that the moon is Лnow spotted and then suddenly shining clearС, as well as da VinciСs
report, referred to in footnote 34 to this chapter.

44. ibid, p. 50.

45. A strong argument in favour of this contention is Kepler's description of the
moon in his Optics of 1604: he comments on the broken character of the boundary
between light and shadow (Werke, II, p. 218) and describes the dark part of the moon
during an eclipse as looking like torn flesh or broken wood (ibid., p. 219). He returns to
these passages in the Conversation (op. cit, p. 27), where he tells Galileo that Лthese
very acute observations of yours do not lack the support of even my own testimony. For
{fin my] Optics you have the half moon divided by awavy line. From this fact I deduced
Peaks and depressions in the body of the moon. [Later on] I describe the moon during
an eclipse as looking like torn flesh or broken wood, with brightstreaks penetrating into
the region of the shadow.С Remember also that Kepler criticizes GalileoСs telescopic
reports on the basis of his own naked eye observations; cf. footnote 24 of this chapter.

46. ЛThere is one other point which I must on no account forget, which I have
noticed and rather wondered at it. It is this: ЛThe middle of the Moon, as it seems, is
occupied by a certain cavity larger than all the rest, and in shape perfectly round. I have
looked at this depression near both the first and the third quarters, and | have
represented it as well as I can in the second illustration already given. It produces the
same appearance as to effects of light and shade as a tract like Bohemia would produce
on the Earth, if it were shut in on all sides by very lofty mountains arranged on the
circumference of a perfect circle; for the tract in the moon is walled in with peaks of
such enormous height that the furthest side adjacent to the dark portion of the moon is


NINE 99
diameter is larger than 3! minutes of arc), while a single glance
convinces us that the face of the moon is not anywhere disfigured by a
blemish of this kind. It would be interesting to see what
contemporary observers had to say on the matter*Ф or, if they were
artists, what they had to draw on the matter.

According to Kepler, the place of the image of a punctiform object
is found by first tracing the path of the rays emerging from the object
according to the laws of (reflection and) refraction until they reach
the eye, and by then using the principle (still taught today) that Лthe
image will be seen in the point determined by the backward
seen bathed in sunlight before the boundary between light and shade reaches half way
across the circular space...С (Messenger, op. cit., pp. 21ff). This description, I think,
definitely refutes KopalСs conjecture of observational laxity. It is interesting tonote the
difference between the woodcuts in the Nuncius (p. 131, Figure 1) and GalileoСs
original drawing. The woodcut corresponds quite closely to the description while the
original drawing with its impressionistic features (ЛKaum eine Karte,С says Wolf) is
vague enough to escape the accusation of gross observational error.

47. ЛI cannot help wondering about the meaning of that large circular cavity in
what I usually call the left corner of the mouth,С writes Kepler (Conversation, op. cit., p.
28), and then proceeds to make conjectures as to its origin (conscious efforts by
intelligent beings included).

48. Contemporary academic optics went beyond simple geometrical constructions
(which Galileo may have known) and included an account of what is seen when looking at
a mirror, or through a lens, or a combination of lenses. Excepting irradiation Galileo
nowhere considers the properties of telescopic vision. Aristotelians writing after
GalileoСs telescopic observations did. Cf. Redondi, op. cit,, pp. 169.

49. I have here disregarded the work of della Porta (De Refractione) and of
Maurolycus who both anticipated Kepler in certain respects (and are duly mentioned
by him). Maurolycus makes the important step [Photismi de Lumine, transl, Henry
Crew, New York, 1940, p. 45 (on mirrors) and p. 74 (on lenses)] of considering only
the Cusp of the caustic; but a connection with what is seen on direct vision is still not
established. For the difficulties which were removed by KeplerСs simple and ingenious
hypothesis cf. Ronchi, Histoire de la Lumiére, Chapter Ill.


100 AGAINST METHOD

intersection of the rays of vision from both eyesС*Ф or, in the case of
monocular vision, from the two sides of the pupil. 5! This rule, which
proceeds from the assumption that Лthe image is the work of the act of
visionС, is partly empirical and partly geometrical. It bases the position
of the image on a Лmetrical triangleФ? or a Лtelemetric triangleС>> as
Ronchi calls it,>* that is constructed out of the rays which finally
arrive at the eye and is used by the eye and the mind to place the image
at the proper distance. Whatever the optical system, whatever the
total path of the rays from the object to the observer, the rule says that
the mind of the observer utilizes its very /ast part only and bases its
visual judgement, the perception, on it.

The rule considerably simplified the science of optics. However, it
needs only a second to show that it is false: take a magnifying glass,
determine its focus, and look at an object close to it. The telemetric
triangle now reaches beyond the object to infinity. A slight change of
distance brings the Keplerian image from infinity to close by and
back to infinity. No such phenomenon is ever observed. We see the
image, slightly enlarged, in a distance that is most of the time
identical with the actual distance between the object and the lens,
The visual distance of theimage remains constant, however much we
may vary the distance between lens and object and even when the
image becomes distorted and, finally, diffuse.

50. Werke, 11, p. 72. The Optics of 1604 has been partly translated into German by
F, Plehn, 7. Keplers Grundlagen der geometrischen Optik, Leipzig, 1922. The relevant
passages occur in section 2 of Chapter 3, pp. 38-48.

51. ibid., p. 67.

52. ЛCum imago sit visus opusС, ibid., p. 64. ЛIn visione tenet sensus communis
oculorum suorum distantiam ex assuefactione, angulos vero ad illam distantiam notat
ex sensu contortionis oculorumС, ibid., p. 66.

53. ЛTriangulum distantiae mensoriumС, ibid., p. 67.

54. Optic, op. cit., p. 44. One should also consult the second chapter of this book
for the history of pre-Keplerian optics.

55. ibid, pp. 182, 202. This phenomenon was known to everyone who had used
magnifying glass only once, Kepler included. Which shows that disregard of familiar
phenomena does not entail that the phenomena were seen differently (cf. text to
footnote 44 to this chapter). Isaac BarrowСs account of the difficulty of KeplerСs rule
was mentioned above (text to footnote 18 to Chapter 5). According to Berkeley (op.
cit., p. 141) Лthis phenomenon .... entirely subverts the opinion of those who will have
us judge of distances by lines and angles. . ..С Berkeley replaces this opinion by his own
theory according to which the mind judges distances from the clarity or confusion of
the primary impressions. KeplerСs idea of the telemetric triangle was adopted at once
by almost all thinkers in the field. It was given a fundamental position by Descartes
according to whom ЛDistantiam ... discimus, per mutuam quandam conspirationem
oculorumС (Dioptrice, quoted from Renati Descartes Specima Philosophiae, Amsterdam,
1657, p. 87). ЛBut,С says Barrow, Лneither thisnor any other difficulty shall ... make me
renounce that which I know to be manifestly agreeable to reason.С It is this attitude


NINE 101
This, then, was the actual situation in 1610 when Galileo
published his telescopic findings. How did Galileo react to it? The
answer has already been given: he raised the telescope to the state
4 . 2 56 H 0
of a Лsuperior and better senseС.°® What were his reasons for doing
which was responsible for the slow advance of a scientific theory of eye glasses and of
visual optics in general. ЛThe reason for this peculiar phenomenon,С writes Moritz von
Rohr (Das Brillenglas als optisches Instrument, Berlin, 1934, p. 1), Лis to be sought in the
dose connection between the eye glass and the eye and it is impossible to give an
acceptable theory of eye glasses without understanding what happens in the process of
vision itself. ...С The telemetric triangle omits precisely this process, or rather gives a
simplistic and false account of it. The state of optics at the beginning of the 20th
century is well described in A. GullstrandСs ЛAppendices to Part IС of HelmholtzСs
Treatise on Physiological Optics, transl. Southall, New York, 1962, pp. 261ff. We read
here how a retum to the psycho-physiological process of vision enabled physicists to
arrive at a more reasonable account even of the physics of optical imagery: ЛThe reason
why the laws of actual optical imagery have been, so to speak, summoned to life by the
requirements of physiological optics is due partly to the fact that by means of
trigonometrical calculations, tedious to be sure, but easy to perform, it has been
possible for the optical engineer to get closer to the realities of his problem. Thus,
thanks to the labours of such men as Abbe and his school, technical optics has attained
its present splendid development; whereas, with the scientific means available, a
comprehensive grasp of the intricate relations in the case of the imagery in the eye has
been actually impossible.С

56. ЛO Nicholas Copernicus, whata pleasure it would have been for you to see this
part of your system confirmed by so clear an experiment!С writes Galileo, implying that
the new telescopic phenomena are additional support for Copernicus (Dialogue, op.
cit, p. 339).

(Mario Giuducci, a follower of Galileo, ascribed irradiation to
refraction by moisture on the surface of the eye, Discourse on the Comets of 1618, op.cit.,
p. 47.) This explanation, plausible as it may seem (especially in view of Galileo's
attempt to show how irradiation can be removed by means other than the telescope) is
Not as straightforward as one might wish. Gullstrand (op. cit., p. 426) says that Лowing
tothe properties of the wave surface of the bundle of rays refracted in the eye... itis a
mathematical impossibility for any cross section to cut the caustic surface in a smooth
curve in the form of a circle concentric with the pupilС. Other authors point to
Лinhomogeneities in the various humours, and above all in the crystalline lensС (Ronchi,
Optics, op. cit., p. 104). Kepler gives this account (Comversation, op. cit., pp. 33ft):
ЛPoint sources of light transmit their cones to the crystalline lens. There refraction
takes place, and behind the lens the cones again contract toa point. But this point does
Not reach as far as the retina. Therefore, the light is dispersed once more, and spreads
over a smalll area of retina, whereas it should impinge on a point. Hence the telescope,
by introducing another refraction, makes this point coincide with the retina...С
Polyak, in his classical work The Retina, attributes irradiation partly to Лdefects of the
dioptrical media and to the imperfect accommodationС but ЛchieflyС to the Лpeculiar
structural constitution of the retina itself (p. 176), adding that it may be a function of
the brain also (p. 429). None of these hypotheses covers ail the facts known about
irradiation. Gullstrand, Ronchi, and Polyak (if we omit his reference to the brain


102 AGAINST METHOD

so? This question brings me back to the problems raised by the
evidence (against Copernicus) that was reported and discussed in
Chapter 8.

which can be made to explain anything we want) cannot explain the disappearance of
irradiation in the telescope. Kepler, Gullstrand and Ronchi also fail to give an account
of the fact, emphasized by Ronchi, that large objects show no irradiation at their edges
(ЛAnyone undertaking to account for the phenomenon of irradiation must admit that
when he looks at an electric bulb from afar so that it seems like a point, he sees it
surrounded by an immense crown of rays whereas from nearby he sees nothing at all
around it,С Optics, op. cit., p. 105). We know nowthatlarge objects are made definite by
the lateral inhibitory interaction of retinal elements (which is further increased by
brain function), cf. Ratliff, Mach Bands, p. 146, but the variation ofthe phenomenon
with the diameter of the object and under the conditions of telescopic vision remains
unexplored. GalileoСs hypothesis received support mainly from its agreement with the
Copernican point of view and was, therefore, largely ad hoc.


On the other hand, there are some telescopic phenomena which are plainly
Copernican. Galileo introduces these phenomena as independent evidence
for Copernicus while the situation is rather that one refuted view —
Copernicanism — has a certain similarity to phenomena emerging from
another refuted view — the idea that telescopic phenomena are faithful
images of the sky.
According to the Copernican theory, Mars and Venus approach and
recede from the earth by a factor of 1:6 or 1:8, respectively. (These
are approximate numbers.) Their change of brightness should be
1:40 and 1:60, respectively (these are GalileoСs values). Yet Mars
changes very little and the variation in the brightmess of Venus Лis
almost imperceptibleС.С These experiences Лovertly contradict the
annual movement [of the earth)С.? The telescope, on the other hand,
produces new and strange phenomena, some of them exposable as
illusory by observation with the naked eye, some contradictory, some
having even the appearance of being illusory, while the only theory
that could have brought order into this chaos, KeplerСs theory of
vision, is refuted by evidence of the plainest kind possible. But — and
with this I come to what I think is a central feature of GalileoСs
procedure — there are telescopic phenomena, namely the telescopic
variation of the brightness of the planets, which agree more closely with
Copernicus than do the results of naked-eye observation. Seen through the
telescope, Mars does indeed change as it should according to the
Copernican view. Compared with the total performance of the
telescope this change is still quite puzzling. It is just as puzzling as is
the Copernican theory when compared with the pre-telescopic
evidence. But the change is in harmony with the predictions of
Copernicus. /t is this harmony zather than any deep understanding of

|. The actual variations of Mars and Venus are four magnitudes and one
magnitude respectively.

2. Dialogue, op. cit,, p. 328.


104 AGAINST METHOD

cosmology and of optics which for Galileo proves Copernicus and the
veracity of the telescope in terrestrial as well as celestial matters. And it is
this harmony on which he builds an entirely new view of the universe.
ЛGalileo, writes Ludovico Geymonat,Ф referring to this aspect of the
situation, Лwas not the first to turn the telescope upon the heavens,
but ... he was the first to grasp the enormous interest of the things
thus seen. And he understood at once that these things fitted in
perfectly with the Copernican theory whereas they contradicted the
old astronomy. Galileo had believed for years in the truth of
Copernicanism, but he had never been able to demonstrate it despite
his exceedingly optimistic statements to friends and colleagues [he
had not even been able to remove the refuting instances, as we have
seen, and as he says himself]. Should direct proof [should even mere
agreement with the evidence] be at last sought here? The more this
conviction took root in his mind, the clearer to him became the
importance of the new instrument. In GalileoСs own mind faith in the
reliability of the telescope and recognition of its importance were not
two separate acts, rather, they were two aspects of the same process.С Can
the absence of independent evidence be expressed more clearly?
ЛThe NunciusС, writes Franz Hammer in the most concise account I
have read of the matter,* Лcontains two unknowns, the one being
solved with the help of the other.С This is entirely correct, except that
the ЛunknownsС were not so much unknown as known to be false, as
Galileo on occasions says himself. It is this rather peculiar situation,
this harmony between two interesting but refuted ideas, which
Galileo exploits in order to prevent the elimination of either.

Exactly the same procedure is used to preserve his new dynamics.
We have seen that this science, too, was endangered by observable
events. To eliminate the danger Galileo introduces friction and other
disturbances with the help of ad hoc hypotheses, treating them as
tendencies defined by the obvious discrepancy between fact and
theory rather than as physical events explained by a theory of friction
for which new and independent evidence might some day become

3. op. cit., pp. 38ff (my italics).

4. Johannes Kepler, Gesammelte Werke, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 447. Kepler (Comversation,
op. cit., p. 14) speaks of Лmutually self-supporting evidenceС. Remember, however,
that what is Лmutually self-supportingС are two refuted hypotheses and not two
hypotheses which have independent support in the domain of basic statements. In a letter
to Herwarth of 26 March 1598, Kepler speaks of the Лmany reasonsС he wants to
adduce for the motion of the earth, adding that Лeach of these reasons, taken for itself,
would find only scant belief (Caspar-Dyck, Johannes Kepler in seinen Briefen, Vol. 1,
Munich, 1930, p. 68).


TEN 105
available (such a theory arose only much later, in the 18th century).
Yet the agreement between the new dynamics and the idea of the
motion of the earth, which Galileo increases with the help of his
method of anamnesis, makes both seem more reasonable.

The reader will realize that a more detailed study of historical
phenomena such as these creates considerable difficulties for the
view that the transition from the pre-Copernican cosmology to that of
the 17th century consisted in the replacement of refuted theories by
more general conjectures which explained the refuting instances,
made new predictions, and were corroborated by observations
carried out to test these new predictions. And he will perhaps see the
merits of a different view which asserts that, while the preCopernican astronomy was in trouble (was confronted by a series of
refuting instances and implausibilities), the Copernican theory was in
even greater trouble (was confronted by even more drastic refuting
instances and implausibilities), but that being in harmony with still
further inadequate theories it gained strength, and was retained, the
refutations being made ineffective by ad hoc hypotheses and clever
techniques of persuasion. This would seem to be a much more
adequate description of the developments at the time of Galileo than
is offered by almost all alternative accounts.

I shall now interrupt the historical narrative to show that the
description is not only factually adequate, but that it is also perfectly
reasonable, and that any attempt to enforce some of the more familiar
methodologies of the 20th century would have had disastrous
consequences.


Such ЛirrationalС methods of support are needed because of the Лuneven
developmentС (Marx, Lenin) of different parts of science. Copernicanism and
other essential ingredients of modern science survived only because reason
was frequently overruled in their past.
A prevalent tendency in philosophical discussions is to approach
problems of knowledge sub specie aeternitatis, as it were. Statements
are compared with each other without regard to their history and
without considering that they might belong to different historical
strata. For example, one asks: given background knowledge, initial
conditions, basic principles, accepted observations — what conclusions can we draw about a newly suggested hypothesis? The answers
vary considerably. Some say that it is possible to determine degrees of
confirmation and that the hypothesis can be evaluated with their help.
Others reject any logic of confirmation and judge hypotheses by their
content, and by the falsifications that have actually occurred. But
almost everyone takes it for granted that precise observations, clear
principles and well-confirmed theories are already decisive; that they
can and must be used here and now to either eliminate the suggested
hypothesis, or to make it acceptable, or perhaps even to prove it.
Such a procedure makes sense only if we can assume that the
elements of our knowledge — the (theories, the observations, the
principles of our arguments — are timeless entities which share the
same degree of perfection, are all equally accessible, and are related
to each other in a way thatis independent of the events that produced
them. This is, of course, an extremely common assumption. It is
taken for granted by most logicians; it underlies the familiar
distinction between a context of discovery and a context of
justification, and it is often expressed by saying that science deals
with propositions and not with statements or sentences. However,
the procedure overlooks that science is a complex and heterogeneous
historical process which contains vague and incoherent anticipations of
future ideologies side by side with highly sophisticated theoretical


ELEVEN 107
Лsystems and ancient and petrified forms of thought. Some of its
elements are available in the form of neatly written statements while
others are submerged and become known only by contrast, by
comparison with new and unusual views. (This is the way in which
the inverted tower argument helped Galileo to discover the natural
interpretations hostile to Copernicus. And this is also the way in
which Einstein discovered certain deep-lying assumptions of
classical mechanics, such as the assumption of the existence of
infinitely fast signals. For general considerations, cf. the last
aragraph of Chapter 5.)
Std they have no immediate three signeanceС They
have much in common with the problems which arise when a power
1. According to Marx, ЛsecondaryС parts of the social process, such as demand,
artistic production or legal relations, may getahead of material production and drag it
along: cf. The Poverty of Philosophy but especially the Introduction to the Critique of
Political Economy, Chicago, 1918, p. 309: ЛThe unequal relation between the
development of material production and art, for instance. In general, the conception of
progress is not to be taken in the sense of the usual abstraction. In the case of art, etc., it
is not so important and difficult to understand this disproportion as in that of practical
social relations, e.g. the relation between education in the U.S. and Europe. The really
difficult point, however, that is to be discussed here is that of the unequal development
of relations of production as legal relations.С Trotsky describes the same situation:
ЛThe gist of the matter lies in this, that the differentaspects of the historical progress —
economics, politics, the state, the growth of the working class - do not develop
simultaneously along parallel linesС (ЛThe School of Revolutionary StrategyС, speech
delivered at the general party membership meeting of the Moscow Organization of
July 1921, published in The First Frve Years of the Communist International, Vol. Il, New
York, 1953, p. 5). See also Lenin, Left-Wing Communism — an Infantile Disorder (op.
cit. p. 59), concerning the fact that multiple causes of an event may be out of phase and
have an effect only when they occur together. In a different form, the thesis of Лuneven
developmentС deals with the fact that capitalism has reached different stages in
different countries, and even in different parts of the same country. This second type
of uneven development may lead to inverse relations between the accompanying
ideologies, so that efficiency in production and radical political ideas develop in inverse
proportions. ЛIn civilized Europe, with its highly developed machine industry, its rich,
multiform culture and its constitutions, a point of history has been reached when the
commanding bourgeoisie, fearing the growth and increasing strength of the
Proletariat, comes out in support of everything backward, moribund, and medieval... .
But all young Asia grows a mighty democratic movement, spreading and gaining in
strengthС (Lenin, ЛBackward Europe and Advanced AsiaС, Collected Works, Vol. 19, op.
cit,, pp. 99ff). For this very interesting situation, which deserves to be exploited for the
Philosophy of science, cf. A.C. Meyer, Leninism, Cambridge, 1957, Chapter 12 and L.
Althusser, For Marz, London and New York, 1970, Chapters 3 and 6. The
Philosophical background is splendidly explained in Mao Tse-tungСs essay On
Contradiction (Selected Readings, Peking, 1970, p. 70, especially section IV).


108 AGAINST METHOD

station is needed right next to a Gothic cathedral. Occasionally, such
features are taken into account; for example, when it is asserted that
physical laws (statements) and biological laws (statements) belong to
different conceptual domains and cannot be directly compared. But
in most cases, and especially in the case observation vs theory, our
methodologies project the various elements of science and the
different historical strata they occupy on to one and the same plane,
and proceed at once to render comparative judgements. This is like
arranging a fight between an infant and a grown man, and announcing
triumphantly, what is obvious anyway, that the man is going to win (the
history of science is full of inane criticisms of this kind and so is the
history of psychoanalysis and of Marxism). In our examination of new
hypotheses we must obviously take the historical situation into
account. Let us see how this is going to affect our judgement!

The geocentric hypothesis and AristotleСs theory of knowledge
and perception are well adapted to each other. Perception supports
the theory of locomotion that entails the unmoved earth and it is in
tur a special case of a comprehensive view of motion that includes
locomotion, increase and decrease, qualitative alteration, generation
and corruption. (This comprehensive view defines motion asС the
transition of a form from an agent toa patient which terminates when
the patient possesses exactly the same form that characterized the
agent at the beginning of the interaction. Perception, accordingly, is a
process in which the form of the object perceived enters the Oo
percipient as precisely the same form that characterized the object so
that the percipient, in a sense, assumes the properties of the object.

A theory of perception of this kind (which one might regard as a
sophisticated version of naive realism) does not permit any major
discrepancy between observations and the things observed. “That
there should be things in the world which are inaccessible to man not
only now, and for the time being, but in principle, and because of his
natural endowment, and which would therefore never be seen by him
— this was quite inconceivable for later antiquity as well as for the
Middle Ages.С* Nor does the theory encourage the use of

2. F.Blumenberg, Galileo Galilei, Sidereus Nuncius, Nachrichtvon neuen Sternen, Vol.
1, Frankfurt, 1965, p. 13. Aristotle himself was more open-minded: ЛThe evidence
(concerning celestial phenomena) is furnished but scantily by sensations, whereas
respecting perishable plants and animals we have abundant information, living as we do
in their midst . . .С, De Part. Anim.,644b26ff. In what follows, a highly idealizedaccountis
givenoflater Aristotelianism. Unless otherwise stated, the word ЛAristotleС refers to this
idealization. For the difficulties in forming a coherent picture of Aristotle himself cf.
Diiring, Aristoteles, Heidelberg, 1966. For some differences between Aristotle and his
mediaeval followers cf. Wolfgang Wieland, Die Aristotelische Physik, Gottingen, 1970.


ELEVEN 109
instruments, for they interfere with the processes in the medium.
ЛThese processes carry a true picture only as long as they are left
undisturbed. Disturbances create forms which are no longer
identical with the shape of the objects perceived — they create
illusions. Such illusions can be readily demonstrated by examining
the images produced by curved mirrors, or by crude lenses (and
remember that the lenses used by Galileo were far from the level of
perfection achieved today): they are distorted, the lens-images have
coloured fringes, they may appear at a place different from the place
of the object and so on. (Astronomy, physics, psychology, epistemology — all these disciplines collaborate with the Aristotelian philosophy
to create a system that is coherent, rational and in agreement with the
results of observation as can be seen from an examination of
Aristotelian philosophy in the form in which it was developed by
some mediaeval philosophers. Such an analysis shows the inherent
power of the Aristotelian system.

The role of observation in Aristotle is quite interesting. Aristotle is
an empiricist. His injunctions against an overly-theoretical approach
are as militant as those of the ЛscientificС empiricists of the 17th and
18th centuries. But while the latter take both the truth and the
content of empiricism for granted, ЛAristotle explains the nature of
experience and why it is important. Experience is what a normal
observer (an observer whose senses are in good order and who is not
drunk or sleepy, etc.) perceives under normal circumstances (broad
daylight; no interference with the medium) and describes in an idiom
that fits the facts and can be understood by all. ExperienceС is
important for knowledge because, given normal circumstances, the
perceptions of the observer contain identically the same forms that
reside in the object. Nor are these explanations ad hoc. They are a
direct consequence of AristotleСs general theory of motion, taken in
conjunction with the physiological idea that sensations obey the same
physical laws as does the rest of the universe. And they are confirmed
by the evidence that confirms either of these two views (the existence
of distorted lens-images being part of the evidence). We understand
today a little better why a theory of motion and perception which is
now regarded as false could be so successful (evolutionary
explanation of the adaptation of organisms; movement in media).

3. Already a plain mirror gives rise to an interesting illusion. To notice it, first
look at yourself in a plain mirror. You will see your face at its ЛnormalС size.
ЛThen let some steam condense on the surface of the mirror and draw the outfine of your face in the steam. The outline will look about half the size of your

e.


110 AGAINST METHOD
The fact remains that no decisive empirical argument could be raised
against it (though it was not free from difficulties).

ЛThis harmony between human perception and the Aristotelian.
cosmology is regarded as illusory by the supporters of the motion of
(the earth, In the view of the Copernicans there exist large-scale
processes which involve vast cosmic masses and yet /eave no trace in
our experience. The existent observations therefore count no longer
as tests of the new basic laws that are being proposed. They are not
directly attached to these laws, and they may be entirely disconnected. Today, after the success of modern science led to the belief
that the relation between man and the universe is not as simple as is
assumed by naive realism, we can say that this was a correct guess,
that the observer is indeed separated from the laws of the world by
the special physical conditions of his observation platform, the
moving earth (gravitational effects, law of inertia; Coriolis forces;
influence of the atmosphere upon optical observations; aberration;
stellar parallax, and so on...), by the idiosyncrasies of his basic
instrument of observation, the human eye (irradiation, after-images;
mutual inhibition of adjacent retinal elements; and so on...) as well
as by older views which have invaded the observation language and
made it speak the language of naive realism (natural interpretations).
Observations may contain a contribution from the thing observed,
but this contribution merges with other effects (some of which we
have just mentioned), and it may be completely obliterated by them.
Just consider the image of a fixed star as viewed through a telescope.
This image is displaced by the effects of refraction, aberration and,
possibly, of gravitation. It contains the spectrum of the star not as it is
now, but as it was some time ago (in the case of extra-galactic
supernovae the difference may be millions of years), and distorted by
Doppler effect, intervening galactic matter, etc. Moreover, the
extension and the internal structure of the image is entirely
determined by the telescope and the eyes of the observer: it is the
telescope that decides how large the diffraction disks are going to be,
and it is the human eye that decides how much of the structure of
these disks is going to be seen. It needs considerable skill and much
theory to isolate the contribution of the original cause, the star, and to
_use it for a test, but this means that non-Aristotelian cosmologies can_
be tested only after we have separated observations and laws with the
help of auxiliary sciences describing the complex processes that
occur between the eye and the object, and the even more complex
(processes between the comea and the brain, We must subdivide what
we perceive to find a core that mirrors the stimulus and nothing else.
In the case of Copernicus we need a new meteorology (in the good old


ELEVEN 111
. . « . ole my Л
§ oe 4
yt oyС
4 and
sie Ay ve
aoe tee A
FIGURE 2. Moon, age seven days (first quarter).


112 AGAINST METHOD

sense of the word, as dealing with things below the moon), a new
science of physiological optics that deals with the subjective (mind) and
the objective (light, medium, lenses, structure of the eye) aspects of
vision as well as a new dynamic: stating the manner in which the
motion of the earth might influence the physical processes at its
surface. Observations become relevant only afer the processes
described by these new subjects have been inserted between the
world and the eye. The language in which we express our
observations may have to be revised as well so that the new cosmology
receives a fair chance and is not endangered by an unnoticed
collaboration of sensations and older ideas. In sum: whatis needed for,

4. Bacon realized that scientific change involves a reformation not only of a few
ideas, but of an entire world-view and, perhaps, of the very nature of humans. ЛFor the
senses are weak and erringС, he writes in Novum Organum, Aphorism 50. ЛFor manСs
sense is falsely asserted to be the standard of things; on the contrary, all the
perceptions, both of the senses and of the mind bear reference to man and not to the
universe, and the human mind resembles those uneven mirrors which impart their
Лown properties to different objects from which rays are emitted and distort and
disfigure themС (Aphorism 41). Bacon repeatedly comments on the Лdullness,
incompetency and errors of the sensesС (50) and permits them only to Лjudge ... the
experimentС while it is the experiment that functions as a judge Лof nature and the thing
itself (50). Thus when Bacon speaks of the Лunprejudiced sensesС he does not mean
sense-data, or immediate impressions, but reactions of a sense organ that has been
rebuilt in order to mirror nature in the right way. Research demands that the entire
human being be rebuilt. This idea of a physical and mental reform of humanity has
religious features. A Лdemolishing branchС (1115), an Лexpiatory processС, a Лpurification
of the mindС (69) must precede the accumulation of knowledge. ЛOur only hope of
salvation is to begin the whole labour of the mind againС (Preface) but only Лafter having
cleansed, polished, and levelled its surfaceС (115). Preconceived notions (36), opinions
(42ff), even the most common words (59, 121) Лmust be abjured and renounced with
firm and solemn resolution ... so that the access to the kingdom of man, which is
founded on the sciences, may resemble that to the kingdom of heaven, where no
admission is conceded except to childrenС (68).

Areform of man is necessary for a correct science — but it is notsufficient. Science,
according to Bacon, not only orders events, it isalso supposed to give physical reasons.
ЛThus Ptolemy and Copernicus give us Лthe number, situation, motion, and periods of
the stars, as a beautiful outside of the heavens, whilst the flesh and the entrails are
wanting; that is, a well fabricated system, or the physical reasons and foundations for a
just theory, that should not only solve phenomena, as almost any ingenious theory may
do, but show the substance, motions and influences of the heavenly bodies as they
really are.С Advancement of Learning, Chapter 4, quoted from Wiley Books, New York,
1944, p. 85. Cf. also the Novum Organum, op. cit. p. 371: ЛFor let no one hope to
determine the question whether the earth or heaven revolve in the diurnal motion,
unless he have first comprehended the nature of spontaneous motionС: the new man
needs a new physics in order to give substance to his astronomy. Galileo did not
succeed in providing such a physics.


ELEVEN 113

It is obvious that such a new world-view will take a long time
appearing, and that we may never succeed to formulate it in its
entirety. It is extremely unlikely that the idea of the motion of the
earth will at once be followed by the arrival, in full formal splendour,
of all the sciences that are now said to constitute the body of Лclassical
physicsС. Or, to be a little more realistic, such a sequence of events is
not only extremely unlikely, it is impossible in principle, given the (e)
nature of humans and the complexities of the world they inhabit.
Today Copernicus, tomorrow Helmholtz — this is but a Utopian
dream. Yet itis only after these sciences have arrived that a test can be
said to make sense.

This need to wait, and to ignore large masses of critical
observations and measurements, is hardly ever discussed in our
methodologies. Disregarding the possibility that a new physics or a
new astronomy might have to be judged by a new theory of knowledge
and might require entirely new tests, empirically inclined scientists at
once confront it with the status quo and announce triumphantly that Лit
is not in agreement with facts and received principlesС. They are of
course right, and even trivially so, but not in the sense intended by
them. For at an early stage of development the contradiction only
indicates that the old and the new are different and out of phase. It does
not show which view is the better one. A judgement of this kind
presupposes that the competitors confront each other on equal
terms. How shall we proceed in order to bring about such a fair
comparison?

The first step is clear: we must retain the new cosmology until it has
been supplemented by the necessary auxiliary sciences. We must
retain it in the face of plain and unambiguous refuting facts. We may,
of course, try to explain our action by saying that the critical
observations are either not relevant or that they are illusory, but we
cannot support such an explanation by a single objective reason.
Whatever explanation we give is nothing but a verbal gesture, a gentle
invitation to participate in the development of the new philosophy.
Nor can we reasonably remove the received theory of perception
which says that the observations are relevant, gives reasons for this
assertion, and is confirmed by independent evidence. (Thus the new
view is arbitrarily separated from data that supported its predecessor

Science-loving philosophers, including those who call themselves ЛcriticalС, are
quick to criticize thinkers who do not share their pet ideas. Bacon was often criticized
for not at once falling for Copernicus. He was criticized for this unspeakable crime by
philosophers whose own ЛrationalismС would never have allowed Copernicus to live.
An example is K.R. Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, Vol. 2, p. 16.


114 AGAINST METHOD

and is made more ЛmetaphysicalС: a new period in the history of
Лscience commences with a backward movement that returns us to an
earlier stage where theories were more vague and had smaller
(empirical content, This backward movement is not just an accident;
it has a definite function; it is essential if we want to overtake the status
quo, for it gives us the time and the freedom that are needed for
developing the main view in detail, and for finding the necessary
auxiliary sciences.°

This backward movement is indeed essential — but how can we
(persuade people to follow our lead? How can we lure them away from

a well-defined, sophisticated and empirically successful system and
make them transfer their allegiance to an unfinished and absurd
hypothesis? To a hypothesis, moreover, that is contradicted by one
observation after another if we only take the trouble to compare it
with what is plainly shown to be the case by our senses? How can we
convince them that the success of the status quo is only apparent and is
bound to be shown as such in 500 years or more, when there is not a
single argument on our side (and remember that the illustrations I
used two paragraphs earlier derive their force from the successes of
classical physics and were not available to the Copernicans).° [It]is)
clear that allegiance to the new ideas will have tobe brought about by
Лmeans other than arguments. It will have to be brought about by
Лirrational means such as propaganda, emotion, ad hoc hypotheses, and
appeal to prejudices of all kinds. We need these Лirrational meansС in
order to uphold what is nothing but a blind faith until we have found
Лthe auxiliary sciences, the facts, the arguments that turn the faith into
Лsound ЛknowledgeС.

Itis in this context that the rise of a new secular class with a new
outlook and considerable contempt for the science of the schools, its oO
methods, its results, even for its language, becomes so important.
The barbaric Latin spoken by the scholars, the intellectual squalor of
academic science, its other-worldliness which is soon interpreted as
uselessness, its connection with the Church — all these elements are

5. An example of a backward movement of this kind is GalileoСs return to the
kinematics of the Commentariolus and his disregard for the machinery of epicycles as
developed in the De Revol. For an admirable rational account of this step cf. Imre
Lakatos and Eli Zaliar, ЛWhy Did CopernicusС Research Programme Supersede
PtolemyСs?С, in /mre Lakatos, Philosophical Papers Vol. 1, Cambridge 1978.

6. They were available tothe sceptics, especially to Aenesidemus, who points out,
following Philo, that no object appears as it is but is modified by being combined with
air, light, humidity, heat, etc.; cf. Diogenes Laertius, IX, 84. However, it seems that the
sceptical view had only little influence on the development of modern astronomy, and
understandably so: one does not start a movement by being reasonable.


ELEVEN Ws
now luiuped together with the Aristotelian cosmology and the
contempt one feels for them is transferred to every single Aristotelian Oo
argument.С This guilt-by-association does not make the arguments
less rational, or less conclusive, but it reduces their influence on the
minds of those who are willing to follow Copernicus. For Copernicus
now stands for progress in other areas as well, he is a symbol for the
ideals of a new class that looks back to the classical times of Plato and
Cicero and forward to a free and pluralistic society. The association
of astronomical ideas and historical and class tendencies does not
produce new arguments either. But it engenders a firm commitment
to the heliocentric view — and this is all that is needed at this stage, as
we have seen. We have also seen how masterfully Galileo exploits the
situation and how he amplifies it by tricks, jokes, and non-sequiturs of
his own.®

We are here dealing with a situation that must be analysed and
understood if we want to adopt a more reasonable attitude towards
the issue between ЛreasonС and ЛirrationalityС. Reason grants that the
ideas which we introduce in order to expand and to improve our

7. For these social pressures cf. OlschkiСs magnificent Geschichte der neusprachlichen wissenschafilichen Literatur. For the role of Puritanism cf. R.F. Jones, op. cit.,
Chapters V and VI.

8. In a remarkable book, Galileo Heretic, Princeton, 1987 (first published, in
Italian, in 1982), Pietro Redondi has described the groups both inside the Church (and
including the Pope himself) and outside of it who looked favourably upon new
scientific developments, the views on perception, continuity, matter and motion that
had been explained by Galileo in his Assayer among them. Being in direct conflict with
the traditional account of the Eucharist, the most important sacrament, these views
were considerably more dangerous than Copernicanism and could be tolerated only as
long as the groups and the Pope himself had the upper hand in the complex political
developments of the time (Thirty YearsС War; French and Spanish politics; the French
alliance with the Pope). The political reversal of the PopeСs fortunes, the accusations of
leniency towards heretics that were raised against him on political grounds cast a
shadow on his attitude towards scientific matters as well (here, too, he seemed to
support heresy) and made protective measures necessary. Redondi tries to show (a)
that the physics of the time was connected with theological doctrines such as the
doctrine of the Eucharist and that a history of science that neglects the connection
becomes incomprehensible and (b) that the attitude towards scientific problems
caused by the connection and thus the attitude towards innovation changed with the
political climate. The second part of (b) may well be true but there is only weak
evidence to support the rest: what Galileo says about atomism in the Assayer is much
too brief and indefinite to conflict with transsubstantiation (it is an aside almost, not an
elaborate statement) and with the exception of a rather problematic document no such
conflict was perceived. (Cf. R.S. Westfall, Essays on the Trial of Galileo, Vatican
Observatory Publications, 1989, pp. 84ff.) What is valuable in RedondiСs account is
that he widens the domain of possible influences and thus undermines the
(anachronistic) belief that then as now scientific rationality was restricted to the
internal problem situation of a scientific discipline.


116 AGAINST METHOD

knowledge may arise in a very disorderly way and that the origin of a
particular point of view may depend on class prejudice, passion.
personal idiosyncrasies, questions of style, and even on error, pure
and simple. But it also demands that in judging such ideas we follow
certain well-defined rules: our evaluation of ideas must not be
invaded by irrational elements! Now, what our historical examples
seem to show is this: there are situations when our most liberal
judgements and our most liberal rules would have eliminated a point
of view which we regard today as essential for science, and would not
have permitted it to prevail — and such situations occur quite
frequently. The ideas survived and they now are said to be in (o)
agreement with reason. They survived because prejudice, passion,
conceit, errors, sheer pigheadedness, in short because all the
elements that characterize the context of discovery, opposed the
dictates of reason and because these irrational elements were permitted to
have their way. To express it differently: Copernicanism and other
ЛrationalС views exist today only because reason was overruled at some time (2)
in their past. (The opposite is also true: witchcraft and other
ЛirrationalС views have ceased to be influential only because reason was
overruled at some time in their past.)°

Now, assuming that Copernicanism is a Good Thing, we must also
admit that its survival is a Good Thing. And, considering the
conditions of its survival, we must further admit that it was a Good
Thing that reason was overruled in the 16th, 17th and even the 18th
centuries. Moreover, the cosmologists of the 16th and 17th centuries
did not have the knowledge we have today, they did not know that
Copernicanism was capable of giving rise to a scientific system that is
acceptable from the point of view of Лscientific methodС. They did not
know which of the many views that existed at their time would lead to
future reason when defended in an ЛirrationalС way. Being without
such guidance they had to make a guess and in making this guess they
could only follow their inclinations, as we have seen. Hence iit is
advisable to let oneСs inclinations goagainst reason in any circumstances,
for it makes life less constrained and science may profit from it.

9. These considerations refute J. Dorling, who, in British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, Vol. 23, 1972. 189f, presents my ЛrationalismС as a presupposition of my
research, not as a result. He continues: Л...one would have thought that thc
philosopher of science would be most interested in picking out and analysing in detail
those scientific arguments which did seem to be rationally reconstructible.С One would
have thought that the philosopher of science would be most interested in picking out
and analysing in detail those moves which are necessary for the advancement of science.
Such moves, | have tried to show, often resist rational reconstruction.


ELEVEN 117

It is clear that this argument, that advises us not to let reason
overrule our inclinations and occasionally to suspend reason
altogether, does not depend on the historical material which I have
presented. If my account of Galileo is historically correct, then the
argument stands as formulated. If it turns out to be a fairy-tale, then
this fairy-tale tells us that a conflict between reason and the
preconditions of progress is possible, it indicates how it might arise,
and it forces us to conclude that our chances to progress may be
obstructed by our desire to be rational. And note that progress is here
defined as a rationalistic lover of science would define it, i.e. as
entailing that Copernicus is better than Aristotle and Einstein better
than Newton. Of course, there is no need to accept this definition,
which is certainly quite narrow. I use it only to show that an idea of
reason accepted by the majority of rationalists may prevent progress
as defined by the very same majority. I now resume the discussion of
some details of the transition from Aristotle to Copernicus.

The first step on the way to a new cosmology, I have said, is a step
back: apparently relevant evidence is pushed aside, new data are
brought in by ad hoc connections, the empirical content of science is
drastically reduced. Now the cosmology that happens to be at the
centre of attention and whose adoption causes us to carry out the
changes just described differs from other views in one respect only: it
has features which at the time in question seem attractive to some
people. But there is hardly any idea that is totally without merit and
that might not also become the starting point of concentrated effort.
No invention is ever made in isolation, and no idea is, therefore,
completely without (abstract or empirical) support. Now if partial
support and partial plausibility suffice to start a new trend — and I
have suggested that they do — if starting a new trend means taking a
step back from the evidence, if any idea can become plausible and can
receive partial support, then the step back is in fact/a step forward,
and away from the tyranny of tightly-knit, highly corroborated, and
gracelessly presented theoretical systems. ЛAnother different errorС,
writes Bacon on precisely this point,!° Лis the ... peremptory
reduction of knowledge into arts and methods, from which time the
sciences are seldom improved; for as young men rarely grow in
stature after their shape and limbs are fully formed, so knowledge,
whilst it lies in aphorisms and observations, remains in a growing

10. Advancement of Learning (1605 edition), New York, 1944, p. 21. Cf. also the
Novum Organum, Aphorisms 79, 86, as well as J.W.N. WatkinsС splendid little book
HobbesС System of Ideas, London, 1965, p. 169.


118 AGAINST METHOD

state; but when once fashioned into methods, though it may be
further polished, illustrated and fitted for use, is no longer increased
in bulk and substance.С

The similarity with the arts which has often been asserted arises at
exactly this point. Once ithas been realized that a close empirical fit is
no virtue and that it must be relaxed in times of change, then style,
elegance of expression, simplicity of presentation, tension of plot and
narrative, and seductiveness of content become important features of
our knowledge. They give life to what is said and help us to overcome
the resistance of the observational material.'! They create and
maintain interest in a theory that has been partly removed from the
observational plane and would be inferior to its rivals when judged by
the customary standards. It is in this context that much of GalileoСs
work should be seen. This work has often been likened to
propagandaЛ — and propaganda it certainly is. But propaganda of this)
kind is not a marginal affair that surrounds allegedly more substantial
means of defence, and that should perhaps be avoided by the
Лprofessionally honest scientistС. In the circumstances we are
considering now, propaganda is of the essence. It is of the essence
because interest must be created at a time when the usual
methodological prescriptions have no point of attack, and because
this interest must be maintained, perhaps for centuries, until new
reasons arrive. It is also clear that such reasons, i.e. the appropriate
auxiliary sciences, need not at once turn up in full formal splendour.
They may at first be quite inarticulate, and may even conflict with the
existing evidence. Agreement, or partial agreement, with the
cosmology is all that is needed in the beginning. The agreement
shows that they are at least relevant and that they may some day
produce full-fledged positive evidence. Thus the idea that the
telescope shows the world as it really is leads to many difficulties. But
the support it lends to, and receives from, Copernicus is a hint thatwe
might be moving in the right direction.

We have here an extremely interesting relation between a general
view and the particular hypotheses which constitute its evidence. It is
often assumed that general views do not mean much unless the
relevant evidence can be fully specified. Carnap, for example, asserts
that Лthere is no independent interpretation for [the language in
terms of which a certain theory or world-view is formulated]. The
system 7 [the axioms of the theory and the rules of derivation] is itself

11. ЛWhat restitutes to scientific phenomenon its life, is artС (The Diary of Anais
Nin, Voll, p. 277).

12. Cf. A. Koyré, Etudes Galiléennes, Vol. Ill, Paris, 1939, pp. 53ff.


ELEVEN 119
an uninterpreted postulate system. [Its] terms obtain only an indirect
and incomplete interpretation by the fact that some of them are
connected by correspondence rules with observational terms.С!
ЛThere is noindependent interpretation,С says Carnapandyetan idea
such as the idea of the motion of the earth, which was inconsistent
with the contemporary evidence, which was upheld by declaring this
evidence to be irrelevant and which was therefore cut from the most
important facts of contemporary astronomy, managed to become a
nucleus, a crystallization point for the aggregation of other
inadequate views which gradually increased in articulation and finally
fused into a new cosmology including new kinds of evidence. There
is no better account of this process than the description which John
Stuart Mill has left us of the vicissitudes of his education. Referring
to the explanations which his father gave him on logical matters he
writes: ЛThe explanations did not make the matter at all clear to me at
the time; but they were not therefore useless; they remained as a
nucleus for my observations and reflections to crystallize upon; the
import of his general remarks being interpreted to me, by the
particular instances which came under my notice afterwards."* In
exactly the same manner the Copernican view, though devoid of
cognitive content from the point of view of a strict empiricism or else
refuted, was needed in the construction of the supplementary
sciences even before it became testable with their help and even
before it, in turn, provided them with supporting evidence of the
most forceful kind.

ЛThere is a further element in this tapestry of moves, influences,
beliefs which is rather interesting and which received attention only
Лrecently — the role of patronage. Today most researchers gain a
Лeputation, a salary and a pension by being associated with a
university and/or a research laboratory. This involves certain
conditions such as an ability to work in teams, a willingness to
Лsubordinate oneСs ideas to those of a team leader, a harmony between
oneСs ways of doing science and those of the rest of the profession, a
certain style, a way of presenting the evidence ~ and so on. Not
Лeveryone fits conditions such as these; able people remain
unemployed because they fail to satisfy some of them. Conversely the
reputation of a university or a research laboratory rises with the
—____

13. ЛThe Methodological Character of Theoretical ConceptsС, Minnesota Studies
in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. |, Minneapolis, p. 47.

14. Autobiography, quoted from Essential Works of John Stuart Mill, ed. Lemer,
New York, 1965, p, 21.


120 AGAINST METHOD

reputation of its members. (In GalileoСs time patronage played a
similar role. There were certain ways of gaining a patron and of
keeping him. The patron in turn rose in estimation only if he
succeeded to attract and to keep individuals of outstanding
achievement, According to Westfall,С the Church permitted the
publication of GalileoСs Dialogue in the full knowledge of the
controversial matters contained in it Л{njot least because a Pope
[Urban VIII] who gloried in his reputation as a Maecenas, was
unwilling to place it in jeopardy by saying no to the light of his timesС,
and Galileo fell because he violated his side of the rules of
patronage.'®

Considering all these elements, the ЛRise of the Copernican
World-ViewС becomes a complicated matter indeed. Accepted
methodological rules are put aside because of social requirements
(patrons need to be persuaded by means more effective than
argument), instruments are used to redefine experience instead of
being tested by it, local results are extrapolated into space despite
reasons to the contrary, analogies abound — and yet all this turns out,
in retrospect, to have been the correct way of circumventing the
restrictions implied by the human condition. This is the material that
should be used to get better insight into the complex process of
knowledge acquisition and improvement.

To sum up the content of the last five chapters:

When the ЛPythagorean ideaС of the motion of the earth was revived
by Copernicus it met with difficulties which exceeded the difficulties
encountered by contemporary Ptolemaic astronomy. Strictly speaking, one had to regard it as refuted. Galileo, who was convinced of the
truth of the Copernican view and who did not share the quite
common, though by no means universal, beliefin a stable experience,
looked for new kinds of fact which might support Copernicus and
still be acceptable to all. Such facts he obtained in two different ways.
First, by the invention of his telescope, which changed the sensory core
of everyday experience and replaced it by puzzling and unexplained
phenomena; and by his principle of relativity and his dynamics, which
changed its conceptual components. Neither the telescopic phenomena

15. op. cit. p. 73.

16. Further details on these matters in Chapter 8, footnote 12 of the present essay,
Westfall, op. cit. and M. Biagioli, Galileo Courtier. M. Finocchiaro, Galileo and the Art
of Reasoning, Dordrecht, 1980, has commented on GalileoСs use of rhetoric, while M.
Pera and W.R. Shea (eds), Persuading Science The Art of Scientific Rhetoric, 1991, and
especially Marcello Pera, Science and Rhetoric, forthcoming, comment on scientific
rhetoricin general.


ELEVEN 121
nor the new ideas of motion were acceptable to common sense (or to
the Aristotelians). Besides, the associated theories could be easily
shown to be false. Yet these false theories, these unacceptable
phenomena, were transformed by Galileo and converted into strong
support of Copernicus. The whole rich reservoir of the everyday
experience and of the intuition of his readers is utilized in the
argument, but the facts which they are invited to recall are arranged
in a new way, approximations are made, known effects are omitted,
different conceptual lines are drawn, so that a new kind of experience
arises, manufactured almost out of thin air, This new experience is
then solidified by insinuating that the reader has been familiar with it Oo
all the time. It is solidified and soon accepted as gospel truth, despite
the fact that its conceptual components are vastly more speculative
than are the conceptual components of common sense. Following
positivistic usage we may therefore say that GalileoСs science rests on
an illustrated metaphysics. The distortion permits Galileo to advance,
but it prevents almost everyone else from making his effort the basis
of acritical philosophy (for a long time emphasis was put either on his
mathematics, or on his alleged experiments, or on his frequent appeal
to the ЛtruthС, and his propagandistic moves were altogether
neglected). I suggest that what Galileo did was to let refuted theories
support each other, that he built in this way a new world-view which
was only loosely (if at all!) connected with the preceding cosmology
(everyday experience included), that he established fake connections
with the perceptual elements of this cosmology which are only now
being replaced by genuine theories (physiological optics, theory of
continua), and that whenever possible he replaced old facts by a new
type of experience which he simply invented for the purpose of
supporting Copernicus. Remember, incidentally, that GalileoСs
procedure drastically reduces the content of dynamics: Aristotelian
dynamics was a general theory of change comprising locomotion,
qualitative change, generation and corruption. GalileoСs dynamics
and its successors deal with locomotion only, other kinds of motion
being pushed aside with the promissory note (due to Democritos)
that locomotion will eventually be capable of comprehending all
motion. Thus, a comprehensive empirical theory of motion is
replaced by a much narrower theory plus a metaphysics of motion,
just as an ЛempiricalС experience is replaced by an experience that
Contains speculative elements. This, I suggest, was the actual
procedure followed by Galileo. Proceeding in this way he exhibited a
style, a sense of humour, an elasticity and elegance, and an awareness
of the valuable weaknesses of human thinking, which has never been
Аqualled in the history of science. Here is an almost inexhaustible


122 AGAINST METHOD
source of material for methodological speculation and, much more
importantly, for the recovery of those features of knowledge which
not only inform, but which also delight us.'7

17. A few years ago Martin Gardner, the pitbull of scientism, published an article
with the tile ЛAnti-Science, the Strange Case of Paul FeyerabendС Critical Inquiry,
Winter 1982/83. The valiant fighter seems to have overlooked these and other
passages. I am not against science. | praise its foremost practitioners and (next chapter)
Лsuggest that their procedures be adopted by philosophers. What | object to is narrowminded philosophical interference and a narrow-minded extension of the latest
scientific fashions to all areas of human endeavour — in short what I object to is a
rationalistic interpretation and defence of science.


————_ 12. —_—_
GalileoСs method works in other fields as well. For example, it can be used to
eliminate the existing arguments against materialism and to put an end to
the philosophical mind/body problem. (The corresponding scientific
problems remain untouched, however.) It does not follow that it should be
universally applied.

Galileo made progress by changing familiar connections between
words and words (he introduced new concepts), words and
impressions (he introduced new natural interpretations), by using
new and unfamiliar principles such as his law of inertia and his
principle of universal relativity, and by altering the sensory core of his
observation statements. His motive was the wish to accommodate the
Copernican point of view. Copernicanism clashes with some obvious
facts, it is inconsistent with plausible, and apparently wellestablished, principles, and it does not fit in with the ЛgrammarС of a
commonly spoken idiom. It does not fit in with the Лform of lifeС that
contains these facts, principles, and grammatical rules. But neither
the rules, nor the principles, nor even the facts are sacrosanct. The
fault may lie with them and notwith the idea that the earth moves. We
may therefore change them, create new facts and new grammatical
rules, and see what happens once these rules are available and have
become familiar. Such an attempt may take considerable time, and in
a sense the Galilean venture is not finished even today. But we can
already see that the changes were wise ones to make and that it would
have been foolish to stick with the Aristotelian form of life to the
exclusion of everything else.

With the mind/body problem, the situation is exactly the same. We
have again observations, concepts, general principles, and grammatical rules which, taken together, constitute a Лform of lifeС that
apparently supports some views, such as dualism, and excludes
others, such as materialism. (I say ЛapparentlyС for the situation is
much less clear here than it was in the astronomical case.) And we
may again proceed in the Galilean manner, look for new natural


124 AGAINST METHOD

interpretations, new facts, new grammatical rules, new principles
which can accommodate materialism and then compare the total
systems — materialism and the new facts, rules, natural interpretations, and principles on the one side; dualism and the old Лforms of
lifeС on the other. Thus there is no need to try, like Smart, to show
that materialism is compatible with the ideology of common sense.
Nor is the suggested procedure as ЛdesperateС (Armstrong) as it must
appear to those who are unfamiliar with conceptual change. The
procedure was commonplace in antiquity and it occurs wherever
imaginative researchers strike out in new directions (Einstein and
Bohr are recent examples).'

So far the argument was purely intellectual. I tried to show that
neither logic nor experience can limit speculation and that
outstanding researchers often transgressed widely accepted limits.
But concepts have not only a logical content; they also have
associations, they give rise to emotions, they are connected with
images. These associations, emotions and images are essential for
the way in which we relate to our fellow human beings. Removing
them or changing them in a fundamental way may perhaps make our
concepts more ЛobjectiveС, but it often violates important social
constraints. It was for this reason that Aristotle refused to abandon an
intuitive view of human beings simply because a more physiological
approach showed successes in a limited domain. For him a person
was a social entity and defined by his or her function in the city no
matter what atomists or physicians involved in theory might say.
Similarly the Roman Church, being interested in souls and not only
in astronomical tricks, forbade Galileo to present his badly founded
guesses as truths and punished him when he violated the prohibition.
The trial of Galileo raises important questions about the role
products of specialists, such as abstract knowledge, are supposed to
play in society. It is for this reason that I shall now give a brief account
of this event.

1. For amore detailed discussion the reader is referred to my Philosophical Popers,
Vol. 1, Chapters 9 and 10.


———_ 13. —
The Church at the time of Galileo not only kept closer to reason as defined
then and, in part, even now; it also considered the ethical and social
consequences of GalileoСs views. Its indictment of Galileo was rational and
only opportunism and a lack of perspective can demand a revision.

There were many trials in the 17th century. The proceedings started
either with accusations made by private parties, with an official act by
a public officer, or with an inquiry based on sometimes rather vague
suspicions. Depending on the location, the distribution of jurisdiction and the balance of power at a particular time, crimes might be
examined by secular courts such as the courts of kings or of free
cities, by Church courts, such as the spiritual courts attached to every
episcopate, or by the special courts of the Inquisition. After the
middle of the 12th century the episcopal courts were greatly aided by
the study of Roman law. Lawyers became so influential that, even if
wholly untrained in canon law and theology, they had a much better
chance of high preferment than a theologian.С The inquisitorial
process removed safeguards provided by Roman law and led to some
well-publicized excesses. What has not been publicized to the same
extent is that the excesses of royal or secular courts often matched
those of the Inquisition. It was a harsh and cruel age.Ф By 1600 the

1. For this complaint (made by Roger Bacon) cf. H. Ch. Lea, A History of the
Inquisition of the Middle Ages, Vol. 1, p. 309. Chapters ixff explain the details of the
inquisitorial procedure, the ways in which they differed from other procedures and the
Teasons for the difference. Cf. also G.G. Coulton, Inquisition and Liberty, Boston,
1959, Chapters XI-XV.

2. Charles Henry Lea, the great liberal historian, writes: ЛOn the whole we may
conclude that the secret prisons of the Inquisition were less intolerable places of abode
than the episcopal and public gaols. The general policy respecting them was more
humane and enlightened than that of other jurisdictions, whether in Spain or
elsewhere, although negligent supervision allowed of abuses and there were ample
Tesources of rigor in reserve, when the obstinacy of the impenitent was to be broken
down. History of the Inquisition in Spain, Vol. 2, New York, 1906, p. 534. Prisoners
accused before secular courts occasionally committed crimes under the jurisdiction of


126 AGAINST METHOD
Inquisition had lost much of its power and aggressiveness. This was
true especially in Italy and more particularly in Venice.*

The courts of the Inquisition also examined and punished crimes
concerning the production and the use of knowledge. This can be
explained by their origin: they were supposed to exterminate heresy,
i.e. complexes consisting of actions, assumptions and talk making
people inclined towards certain beliefs. The surprised reader who
asks what knowledge has to do with the law should remember the
many legal, social and financial obstacles knowledge-claims face
today. Galileo wanted his ideas to replace the existing cosmology, but
he was forbidden to work towards that aim. Today the much more
modest wish of creationists to have their views taught in schools side
by side with other and competing views runs into laws setting up a
separation of Church and State.Ф Increasing amounts of theoretical
and engineering information are kept secret for military reasons and
are thereby cut off from international exchange.> Commercial
interests have the same restrictive tendency. Thus the discovery of
superconductivity in ceramics at (relatively) high temperatures,
which was the result of international collaboration, soon led to
protective measures by the American government.® Financial
arrangements can make or break a research programme and an entire
profession. There are many ways to silence people apart from
forbidding them to speak — and all of them are being used today. The
process of knowledge production and knowledge distribution was
the Church so that they might be handed over to the Inquisition: Henry Kamen, Die
Spanische Inquisition, Munich, 1980, p. 17.

3. In 1356 the secular officials of Venice forbade the Inquisitor of Treviso to try his
prisoners, seized his informants and tortured them on the charge of pilfering the
property of the accused. Lea, Inquisition in the Middle Ages, Vol. ii, p. 273.

4. A comprehensive report of one of the trials that resulted from the conflict has
been published in Science, Vol. 215, 1982, pp. 934ff. Many other trials followed.

5. It seems that the need for secrecy in nuclear matters was first raised by the
scientists themselves. Cf. the report and the documents in Spencer R. Weart and
Gertrude Weiss-Szilard (eds), Leo Szilard, His Version of the Facts, Cambridge, Mass.,
1978, esp. Chapters 2ff. Cf. also the material on the Oppenheimer case. The inventor
of the telescope was forced to secrecy as the military importance of the contrivance was
soon realized. Cf. Chapter 8, footnote 24.

Research teams become very secretive when approaching what they think is a Big
Discovery. After all, what isat stake are patents, consultancies in industry, money and,
perhaps, the honour of a Nobel Prize. For a special case cf. R.M. Haze,
ЛSuperamduaors, London, 1988. The manipulation of knowledge by the courts is
discussed, with many examples, by Peter W. Huber, Galileo's Revenge, New York,
1991.

6. Science, Vol. 237, 1987, pp. 476ff and 593f. An important step towards
exclusiveness consisted in assigning part of the research to the military.


THIRTEEN 127
never the free, ЛobjectiveС, and purely intellectual exchange
rationalists make it out to be.

The trial of Galileo was one of many trials. It had no special
features except perhaps that Galileo was treated rather mildly,
despite his lies and attempts at deception.С But a small clique of
intellectuals aided by scandal-hungry writers succeeded in blowing it
up to enormous dimensions so that what was basically an altercation
between an expert and an institution defending a wider view of things
now looks almost like a battle between heaven and hell. This is
childish and also very unfair towards the many other victims of 17thcentury justice. It is especially unfair towards Giordano Bruno, who
was burned but whom scientifically minded intellectuals prefer to
forget. It is not a concern for humanity but rather party interests
which play a major role in the Galileo hagiography. Let us therefore
take a closer look at the matter.®

The so-called trial of Galileo consisted of two separate
proceedings, or trials. The first occurred in 1616. The Copernican
doctrine was examined and criticized. Galileo received an order, but
he was not punished. The second trial took place in 1632/33. Here
the Copernican doctrine was no longer the point at issue. Rather,
what was considered was the question of whether Galileo had obeyed
the order given him in the first trial, or whether he had deceived the
inquisitors into believing that the order had never been issued. The
proceedings of both trials were published by Antonio Favaro in Vol.
19 of the National Edition of Galilean material. The suggestion,
rather popular in the 19th century, that the proceedings contained

7. An example is GalileoСs reply to the inquiries of 12 April 1633: Maurice A.
Finocchiaro, The Galileo Affair, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1989, p. 262, the first two
lines. The reaction of an admirer is characteristic: ЛThis absurd pretence...Ф
Geymonat, op.cit., p. 149.

8. Itcannot be denied that pressure groups, personal grievances, envy, the fact that
Galileo, Лbeing too infatuated with his own geniusС was ЛunsufferableС (Westfall, op.
cit, pp. 52, 38) and the rules of patronage played an important role as they, or similar
circumstances, do at every trial. However, the tensions between various groups of the
Church on the one side and the demands for scientific autonomy on the other were
real enough; after all, their modern successors (should the sciences be given the run of
our educational institutions and of society as a whole or should they be treated like any
other special interest group?) are still with us. Here the Church did the right thing: the
sciences do not have the last word in humane matters, knowledge included.

The main documents pertaining to the trial were assembled and translated with
comments and an introduction by Finocchiaro, op. cit. I shall use his translations.
Accounts of the trials and their problems are found in G. de Santillana, The Crime of
Wills Chicago, 1954, Geymonat, op. cit., Redondi, op. cit., and, most recently, in


128 AGAINST METHOD
falsified documents and that the second trial was therefore a farce,
seems no longer acceptable.Ф

The first trial was preceded by denunciations and rumours, in
which greed and envy played a part, as in many other trials. The
Inquisition started to examine the matter. Experts (qualificatores)
were ordered to give an opinion about two statements which
contained a more or less correct account of the Copernican
doctrine.'© Their decisionС! concerned two points: what would
today be called the scientific content of the doctrine and its ethical
(social) implications.

On the first point the experts declared the doctrine to be Лfoolish
and absurd in philosophyС or, to use modern terms, they declared it to
be unscientific. This judgement was made without reference to the
faith, or to Church doctrine, but was based exclusively on the
scientific situation of the time. It was shared by many outstanding
scientists (Tycho Brahe having been one of them) — and it was
correct'* when based on the facts, the theories and the standards of

9. One of the authors of the suggestion was the Galileo scholar Emil Wohlwill. His
reasons, rather impressive at the time, are given in his Der /nquisitionsprozess des Galileo
Galilei, Berlin, 1870. According to Wohlwill two documents of the proceedings, dated
25 Feb. 1616 and 26 Feb. 1616 (Finocchiaro, op. cit., pp. 147f) are mutually
contradictory. The first advises Galileo to treat Copernicus as a mathematical model;
should he reject the advice, then he is forbidden to mention Copernicus in any form
whatsoever. In the second document Galileo is advised as above and immediately
forbidden (ie. without waiting for his reaction) to mention Copernicus. Wohlwill
thought the second document to be a forgery. This seems now refuted. Cf. de
Santillana, Chapter 13. Stillman Drake (appendix to Geymonat) devised a very
intriguing hypothesis to explain the discrepancy.

10. Some critics used idiosyncrasies in the formulation as proof of a lack of comprehension on the part of the experts. But there was no need for the inquisitors to stick
closely to the language of the authors they examined. Their account of Copernicanism
was clear enough without such textual puritanism.

11. Finocchiaro, op. cit, p. 146.

12. Note that in rendering my judgements I rely on standards subscribed to by
many modem scientists and philosophers of science. Returned to the early 17th
century, these champions of rationality would have judged Galileo as the Aristotelians
judged him then. Michelson, for example, would have been aghast at GalileoСs attempt
to get knowledge out of an instrument as little understood as the telescope and
Rutherford, who was never too happy about the theory of relativity, would have
produced one of his characteristic rude remarks. Salvador Luria, an outstanding
microbiologist who favours theories decidable by Лclear-cut experimental stepis]С,
would have relegated the debate to Лoutfields of scienceС like ЛsociologyС and would
have stayed away from it (A Slot Machine, a Broken Test Tube, New York, 1985, pp. 115,
119). For what Galileo suggested was no less than to regard as true a theory which had
only analogies in its favour and which suffered from numerous difficulties. And he
made this suggestion in public while even today it is a deadly sin for a scientist to
address the public before having consulted his peers (example in A. Pickering,


THIRTEEN 129
the time. Compared with those facts, theories and standards the idea
of the motion of the earth was as absurd as were VelikovskyСs ideas
when compared with the facts, theories and standards of the fifties. A
modern scientist really has no choice in this matter. He cannot cling
to his own very strict standards and at the same time praise Galileo
for defending Copernicus. He must either agree with the first part of
the judgement of the Church experts, or admit that standards, facts
and laws never decide a case and that an unfounded, opaque and
incoherent doctrine can be presented as a fundamental truth. Only
few admirers of Galileo have an inkling of this rather complex
situation.

The situation becomes even more complex when we consider that
the Copernicans changed not only views, but also standards for
judging views. Aristotelians, in this respect not at all unlike modern
epidemiologists, molecular biologists and ЛempiricalС sociologists
who insist either on the examination of large statistical samples or on
Лclearcut experimental stepsС in LuriaСs sense, demanded strong
empirical support while the Galileans were content with farreaching, unsupported and partially refuted theories.'? I do not
criticize them for that; on the contrary, I favour Niels BohrСs Лthis is
not crazy enoughС. I merely want to reveal the contradiction in the
actions of those who praise Galileo and condemn the Church, but
become as strict as the Church was at GalileoСs time when turning to
the work of their contemporaries.

On the second point, the social (ethical) implications, the experts

declared the Copernican doctrine to be Лformally hereticalС. This
means it contradicted Holy Scripture as interpreted by the Church,
and it did so in full awareness of the situation, not inadvertently (that
would be ЛmaterialС heresy).
ЛConstraints on Controversy: the Case of the Magnetic MonopoleС, Social Studies of
Science, Vol. 11, 1981, pp. 63ff). All this is realized neither by ЛprogressiveС (i.e.
scientifically inclined) princes of the Churchnor by scientists, so the discussion of the
Лtrial of GalileoС occurs in a dream world with only little relation to the real world we
and Galileo inhabit. Further arguments on that point are found in Chapter 9 of
Farewell to Reason and Chapter 19 below.

13. As indicated in Chapter 8, foomote 1, GalileoСs law of inertia was in conflict
with the Copernican as well as the Keplerian treatment of planetary motion. Galileo
hoped for future accommodations. That was a sensible thing to do but not in
agreement with some standards of his time and of today. Today a similar clash between
theoreticians and empiricists occurs in the field of epidemiology. There are theoretical
Teasons to expect that X-rays and other forms of particulate radiation constitute a
cancer-risk down to the smallest dose. Many epidemiologists demand empirical proof,
however, though it is clear that events, when occurring below a certain threshold of
frequency, cannot be detected in that way.


130 AGAINST METHOD

The second point rests on a series of assumptions, among them the
assumption that Scripture is an important boundary condition of
human existence and, therefore, of research. The assumption was
shared by all great scientists, Copernicus, Kepler and Newton among
them. According to Newton knowledge flows from two sources — the
word of God — the Bible — and the works of God — Nature; and he
postulated divine interventions in the planetary system, as we have
seen.

The Roman Church in addition claimed to possess the exclusive
rights of exploring, interpreting and applying Holy Scripture. Lay
people, according to the teaching of the Church, had neither the
knowledge nor the authority to tamper with Scripture and they were
forbidden to do so. This comment, whose rigidity was a result of the
new Tridentine Spirit,!> should not surprise anyone familiar with
the habits of powerful institutions. The attitude of the American
Medical Association towards lay practitioners is as rigid as the
attitude of the Church was towards lay interpreters — and it has the
blessing of the law. Experts, or ignoramuses having acquired the
formal insignia of expertise, always tried and often succeeded in
securing for themselves exclusive rights in special domains. Any
criticism of the rigidity of the Roman Church applies also to its
modern scientific and science-connected successors.

Turning now from the form and the administrative backing of the
objection to its content we notice that it deals with a subject that is
gaining increasing importance in our own times — the quality of
human existence. Heresy, defined in a wide sense, meant a deviation
from actions, attitudes and ideas that guarantee a well-rounded and
sanctified life. Such a deviation might be, and occasionally was,
encouraged by scientific research. Hence, it became necessary to
examine the heretical implications of scientific developments.

Two ideas are contained in this attitude. First, it is assumed that
the quality of life can be defined independently of science, that it may
clash with demands which scientists regard as natural ingredients of
their activity, and that science must be changed accordingly.
Secondly, it is assumed that Holy Scripture as interpreted by the
Holy Roman Church adumbrates a correct account of a wellrounded and sanctified life.

14. Chapter 5, footmote 4. See also the literature in foomote 6 to Chapter 4.
According to Galileo (letter to Grand Duchess Christina) the idea of the two sources
goes back to Tertullian adv. Marciones (E. Evans, ed.), 1, 18.

15. For the exact wording see Denzinger-Schoenmetzer, Enchiridion Symbolorum,
36th edition, Freiburg, 1976, pp. 365f.


THIRTEEN 131

The second assumption can be rejected without denying that the
Bible is vastly richer in lessons for humanity than anything that might
ever come out of the sciences. Scientific results and the scientific
ethos (if there is such a thing) are simply too thin a foundation for a
life worth living. Many scientists agree with this judgement.'®

They agree that the quality of life can be defined independently of
science — which is the first part of the first assumption. At the time of
Galileo there existed an institution — the Roman Church — watching
over this quality in its own particular way. We must conclude that the
second point — Copernicus being Лformally hereticalС — was
connected with ideas that are urgently needed today. The Church
was on the right track.

But was it perhaps mistaken in rejecting scientific opinions
inconsistent with its idea of a Good Life? In Chapter 3 I argued that
knowledge needs a plurality of ideas, that well-established theories

16. Thus Konrad Lorenz in his interesting if somewhat superficial book Die Acht
Todsiinden der Zivilisierten Menschheit, Munich, 1984 (first published in 1973), p. 70
writes: ЛThe erroneous belief that only what can be rationally grasped or even what can
be proved ina scientific way constitutes the solid knowledge of mankind has disastrous
consequences. It prompts the “scientifically enlightenedФ younger generation to
discard the immense treasures of knowledge and wisdom that are contained in the
traditions of every ancient culture and in the teachings of the great world religions.
Whoever thinks that all this is without significance naturally succumbs to another,
equally pernicious mistake, living in the conviction that science is able, as a matter of
course, to create from nothing, and in a rational way, an entire culture with all its
ingredients.С In a similar vein J. Needham, initiator and part-author of a great history
of Chinese science and technology, speaks of Лscientific opiumС, meaning by it Лa
blindness to the suffering of othersС. Time, the Refreshing River, Nottingham, 1986.

ЛRationalismС, writes Peter Medawar (Advice to a Young Scientist, New York, 1979, p.
101), Лfalls short of answering the many simple and childlike questions people like to
ask; questions about origins and purposes suchas are often contemptuously dismissed
as non-questions, or pseudo-questions, although people understand them clearly
enough and long to have ananswer. These are intellectual pains that rationalists — like
bad physicians confronted by ailments they cannot diagnose or cure — are apt to
dismiss as “imaginationФ.С

ЛThe clearest and most perceptive statement is found in Jacques Monod, Chance and
Necessity, New York, 1972, p. 170 (text in brackets from p. 169): ЛCold and austere,Ф
writes Monod, Лproposing no explanation but imposing an ascetic renunciation of all
other spiritual fare, (the idea that objective knowledge is the only authentic source of
truth | was not of a kind to allay anxiety but aggravated it instead. By a single stroke it
claimed to sweep away the traditions of hundreds of thousands of years, which had
become one with human nature itself. It wrote an end to the ancient animist convenant
between man and nature, leaving nothing in place of that precious bond but an anxious
quest in a frozen universe of solitude. With nothing to recommend it but a certain
puritan arrogance, how could such an idea win acceptance? It did not; it still has not. It

'a8 however commanded recognition; but that it did only because of its prodigious
power of performance.С


132 AGAINST METHOD

are never strong enough to terminate the existence of alternative
approaches, and that a defence of such alternatives, being almost the
only way of discovering the errors of highly respected and
comprehensive points of view, is required even by a narrow
philosophy such as empiricism. Now if it should turn out that it is also
required on ethical grounds, then we have tworeasons instead of one
rather than a conflict with ЛscienceС.

Besides, the Church, and by this I mean its most outstanding
spokesmen, was much more modest than that. It did not say: what
contradicts the Bible as interpreted by us must go, no matter how
strong the scientific reasons in its favour. A truth supported by
scientific reasoning was not pushed aside. It was used to revise the
interpretation of Bible passages apparently inconsistent with it.
There are many Bible passages which seem to suggest a flat earth.
Yet Church doctrine accepted the spherical earth as a matter of
course. On the other hand the Church was not ready to change just
because somebody had produced some vague guesses. It wanted
proof — scientific proof in scientific matters. Here it acted no
differently from modern scientific institutions: universities, schools
and even research institutes in various countries usually wait a long
time before they incorporate new ideas into their curricula.
(Professor Stanley Goldberg has described the situation in the case
of the special theory of relativity.) But there was as yet no convincing
proof of the Copernican doctrine. Hence Galileo was advised to
teach Copernicus as a hypothesis; he was forbidden to teach it as a
truth.

This distinction has survived until today. But while the Church
was prepared to admit that some theories might be true and even that
CopernicusС might be true, given sufficient evidence,Ф there are

17. In a widely discussed letter which Cardinal Roberto Bellarmino, master of
controversial questions at the Collegio Romano, wrote on 12 April 1615 to Paolo
Antonio Foscarini, a Carmelite monk from Naples who had inquired about the reality
of the Copernican system, we find the following passage (Finocchiaro, op. cit,, p. 68):
Л... iftherewerea true demonstration that the sun is at thecenter of the world and the
earth in the third heaven, and that the sun does not circle the earth but the earth circles
the sun, then one would have to proceed with great care in explaining the Scriptures
that appear contrary, and say rather that we do not understand them than that what is
demonstrated is false. But | will not believe that there is such a demonstration, until it is
shown me. Nor is it the same to demonstrate that by supposing the sun to be at the
center and the earth in heaven one can save the appearances, and to demonstrate that
in truth the sun is at the center and the earth in heaven; for | believe the first
demonstration may be available, but I have very great doubts about the second, and in
case of doubt we must not abandon the Holy Scripture as interpreted by the Holy
Fathers.С In his Considerations on the Copernican Opinion, Finocchiaro, op. cit,, pp. 70ft,


THIRTEEN 133
now many scientists, especially in high energy physics, who view all
theories as instruments of prediction and reject truth-talk as being
metaphysical and speculative. Their reason is that the devices they
use are so obviously designed for calculating purposes and that
theoretical approaches so clearly depend on considerations of
elegance and easy applicability that the generalization seems to make
good sense. Besides, the formal properties of ЛapproximationsС often
differ from those of the basic principles, many theories are first steps
towards a new point of view which at some future time may yield them
as approximations and a direct inference from theory to reality is
therefore rather naive.'® All this was known to 16th- and 17thcentury scientists. Only a few astronomers thought of deferents and
epicycles as real roads in the sky; most regarded them as roads on
paper which might aid calculation but which had no counterpart in
reality. The Copernican point of view was widely interpreted in the
same way — as an interesting, novel and rather efficient model. The
Church requested, both for scientific and for ethical reasons, that
Galileo accept this interpretation. Considering the difficulties the
model faced when regarded as a description of reality, we must admit
that Л[I]ogic was on the side of . . . Bellarmine and not on the side of
Galileo, as the historian of science and physical chemist Pierre
Duhem wrote in an interesting essay.!?

Tosum up: the judgement of the Church experts was scientifically
correct and had the right social intention, viz. to protect people from
the machinations of specialists. It wanted to protect people from
being corrupted by a narrow ideology that might work in restricted
domains but was incapable of sustaining a harmonious life. A revision
of the judgement might win the Church some friends among
scientists but would severely impair its function as a preserver of
important human and superhuman values.Ф°
esp. pp. 85f, Galileo addresses precisely these points. He agrees that if the Copernican
astronomers are Лnot more than ninety percent right, they may be dismissedС but adds
that Лif all that is produced by philosophers and astronomers on the opposite side is
shown to be mostly false and wholly inconsequential, then the other side should not be
disparaged, nor deemed paradoxical, so as to think that it could never be clearly
ProvedС: research should be permitted even if demonstrations are not yet available.
ЛThis does not conflict with BellarminoСs suggestions; it did conflict and to a certain
extent still does conflict with the attitude of many modern research institutions.

\ olС: More on this point in Nancy Cartwright, Hom the Laws of Physics Lie, Oxford,

19. To Save the Phenomena, Chicago, 1963, p. 78.

20. After some apparent willingness to consider the matter (cf. the address of Pope
John Paul Il on the centenary of EinsteinСs birth, published as an Epilogue in Paul
Cardinal Poupard (ed.), Galileo Galilei: Towards a Resolution of 350 Years of Debate,


134 AGAINST METHOD

Pittsburgh, 1987) Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, who holds a position similar to that once
held by Bellarmine, formulated the problem in a way that would make a revision of the
judgement anachronistic and pointless. Cf. his talk in Parma of 15 March 1990, partly
reported in /! Sabato, 31 March 1990, pp. 80ff. As witnesses the Cardinal quoted
Emst Bloch (being merely a matter of convenience the scientific choice between
geocentrism and heliocentrism cannot overrule the practical and religious centricity of
the earth), C.F. von Weizsicker (Galileo leads directly to the atom bomb) and myself
(the chapter heading of the present chapter). | commented on the speech in two
interviews, I Sabato, 12 May 1990, pp. 54ff and La Repubblica, 14 July 1990, p. 20.


—_——_ 14 —
GalileoСs inquiries formed only a small part of the so-called Copernican
Revolution. Adding the remaining elements makes it still more difficult to
reconcile the development with familiar principles of theory evaluation.
Galileo was not the only scientist involved in the reform of physics,
astronomy and cosmology. Neither did he deal with the whole area of
astronomy. For example, he never studied the motion of the planets
in as much detail as did Copernicus and Kepler and he probably
never read the more technical parts of CopernicusС great work. That
was not unusual. Then as now knowledge was subdivided into
specialities; an expert in one field rarely was also an expert in another
and distant field. And then as now scientists with widely diverging philosophies could and did comment on new suggestions
and developments. Tycho Brahe was an outstanding astronomer;
his observations contributed to the downfall of generally accepted
views. He noticed the importance of CopernicusС cosmology —
yet he retained the unmoved earth, on physical as well as on
theological grounds. Copernicus was a faithful Christian and a good
Aristotelian, he tried to restore centred circular motion to the
prominence it once had, postulated a moving earth, rearranged the
planetary orbits and gave absolute values for their diameters. The
astronomers surrounding Melanchthon and his educational reform
accepted and praised the first part of his achievement, but (with a
single exception — Rheticus) either disregarded, or criticized, or
reinterpreted (Osiander!) the second. And they often tried to transfer
CopernicusС mathematical models to the Ptolemaic system.!
Maestlin, KeplerСs teacher, regarded comets as solid bodies and tried
calculating the orbit of one of them. His (incorrect) result made him
accept the Copernican arrangement of the planetary orbits (it still

1. Details and literature in R.S. Westman, ЛThe Melanchthon Circle, Rheticus,
and the Wittenberg Interpretation of the Copernican TheoryС, /sis, Vol. 66, 1975,
Pp. 165ff.


136 AGAINST METHOD

influenced Kepler). Maestlin respected Aristotle but regarded
mathematical correctness and harmony as signs of physical truth.
GalileoСs approach had its own idiosyncrasies, it was more complex,
more conjectural, partly adapted to the greater role theological
considerations played in Italy, partly determined by the laws of
rhetoric or patronage. Many different personalities, professions and
groups guided by different beliefs and subjected to different
constraints contributed to the process that is now being described,
somewhat summarily, as the ЛCopernican RevolutionС.

As I said at the beginning this process was not a simple thing
but consisted of developments in a variety of subjects, among
them the following: cosmology; physics; astronomy; the calculation
of astronomical tables; optics; epistemology; and theology.

I draw these distinctions not Лin order to be preciseС but because
they reflect actually existing subdivisions of research. Physics, for
example, was a general theory of motion that described change
without reference to the circumstances under which it occurred. It
comprised locomotion, the growth of plants and animals as well as
the transition of knowledge from a wise teacher to an ignorant pupil.
AristotleСs Physics and the many mediaeval commentaries on it give us
an idea of the problems treated and the solutions proposed.
Cosmology described the structure of the universe and the special
motions that are found in it. A basic law of physic in the sense just
explained was that a motion without motor comes to a standstill — the
ЛnaturalС situation of a body is rest (this includes lack of qualitative
change). The ЛnaturalС motions of cosmology were those that occurred
without noticeable interference; examples are the upward motion of
fire and the downward motion of stones. AristotleСs On the Heavens
and the many mediaeval commentaries on it give us an idea of the
problems and the view discussed in this domain.

The books I just mentioned were for advanced studies only.
Introductory texts omitted problems and alternative suggestions and
concentrated on the bare bones of the ideas then held. One of the
most popular introductory texts of cosmology, SacroboscoСs de spera,
contained a sketch of the world, and described the main spheres
without giving the details of their motions — the rest is silence.Ф Still,

2. Cf. Lynn Thorndyke (ed.), The Sphere of Sacrobosco and Its Commentators,
Chicago, 1949. The elements and their motions are briefly mentioned in the first
chapter together with a simple argument in favour of the unmoved earth: the earth is
situated in the centre (this is shown earlier by optical arguments, including the fact that
the constellations have the same size, no matter where the daily rotation puts them)
and Лquicquid a medio movetur versus circumferentiam ascendit. Terra a medio
movetur, ergo ascendit, quod pro impossibile relinquiturС (p. 85). Equant, deferent


FOURTEEN 137
it was used as a basis for rather advanced critical comments down to
GalileoСs own time.

Physics and cosmology claimed tomake true statements. Theology
which also claimed to make true statements was regarded as a
boundary condition for research in these fields though the strength of
this requirement and ofits institutional backing varied in time and with
the location. It was never a necessary boundary condition for
astronomy which dealt with the motions of the stars, but without
claiming truth for its models. Astronomers were interested in models
that might correspond to the actual arrangement of the planets, but
they were not restricted to them. Handbooks of astronomy such as
PtolemyСs handbook and the various popularizations based on it
contained detailed astronomical models preceded by sketchy
cosmological introductions. As far as these introductions were
concerned, there existed only one cosmology— AristotleСs. Some of the
handbooks also contained tables. Tables were a further step away from
ЛrealityС. They not only used ЛhypothesesС, i.e. models that might not
reflect the structure of reality, they also used approximations. But an
astronomerСs approximations did not always correspond to the
excellence of his models. ЛAdvancedС (from our standpoint) models
might be combined with crude approximations and thus give worse
tables than their older counterparts.С

The separation between physics and cosmology on the one side
and astronomy on the other was not only a practical fact; it also had a
firm philosophical backing. According to AristotleС mathematics
does not deal with real things but contains abstractions. There exists
therefore an essential difference between physical subjects such as
physics, cosmology, biology and psychology and mathematical
subjects such as optics and astronomy. In the encyclopaedias of the
early Middle Ages the separation was a matter of course.

Optical textbooks only rarely dealt with astronomical matters.*
Astronomy used basic optical laws such as the law of linear
Propagation, but the more complicated parts of optical theory were
and epicycle are mentioned in the fourth chapter together with the miraculous nature
of the solar eclipse accompanying ChristСs death.

3. The example of Ptolemy-Copernicus is treated by Stanley E. Babb Jr. in /sis,
Vol. 68, September 1977, especially p. 432.

4. Met, Book xiii, Chapter 2; Physics, Book ii, Chapter 2. For an account and
defence of AristotleСs theory of mathematics ct. Chapter 8 of my Farewell to Reason.

5. As an example I mention John PechamСs optics (quoted from David Lindberg
(ed.), John Pecham and the Science of Optics, Madison, 1970): astronomical matters
Лoccur here on pages 153 (moon illusion and the northward displacement of the sun
and the fixed stars, explained by vapours near the horizon), 209 (scintillation of the


138 AGAINST METHOD

not well known. The same is true of epistemology. GalileoСs
arguments (and the arguments of Copernicus on which they are
based) brought epistemology back into science (the same happened
many years later, in connection with the quantum theory).

Now is it to be expected that a collection of relatively independent
subjects, research strategies, arguments and opinions such as the one
just mentioned will develop in a uniform way? Can we really assume
that all the physicists, cosmologists, theologians and philosophers
who reacted to the Copernican doctrine were guided by the same
motives and reasons and that these reasons were not only accepted by
them, but were also regarded as being binding for any scientist
entering the scene? The ideas of an individual scientist such as
Einstein may show a certain coherence® and this coherence may be
reflected in his standards and his theorizing. Coherence is to be
expected in totalitarian surroundings that guide research either by
laws, by peer pressure or by financial machinations. But the
astronomers at the time of Copernicus and after did not live in such
surroundings, they lived at a time of dissension, wars and general
upheaval, at a time when one city (Venice, for example, and the cities
under its jurisdiction) would be safe for a progressive scientist while
another (such as Rome, or Florence) offered considerable dangers,
and when the ideas of a single individual often faced groups of
scientists not in agreement with his monomania. To show this, let us
look at two astronomers who participated in the development:
Copernicus himself and Maestlin, KeplerСs teacher.

Copernicus wanted to reform astronomy. He explained his
misgivings and the ways in which he tried to overcome them. He
wrote:Ф

stars explained by unevennesses of their rotating surfaces which reflect the sunlight),
218 (impossibility to determine the size of the stars from their appearances), 233
(stars appear to be smaller than they actually are), 225 (they are displaced towards
the north at the horizon, and the more so, the greater their distance from the
meridian).

6. The case of Einstein shows that even this modest assumption goes much too far.
Einstein recommended a loose opportunism as the best research strategy (cf. the
quotation in the text to footnote 6 of the Introduction) and he warned that a good joke
(such as the considerations leading to the special theory of relativity) should not be
repeated too often: Philipp Frank, Einstein, His Life and Times, London, 1946, p. 261.

7. Commentariolus, ed. E. Rosen, Three Copernican Treatises, 3rd edition, New
York, 1971, translation partly changed in accordance with F. Krafft, ЛCopernicus
Retroversus IС, Colloquia Copernicana III and IV, Proceedings of the Joint Symposium
of the IAU and the IUHPS, Torun, 1973, p. 119. In what follows I shall also use
Krafft, ЛCopernicus Retroversus IIС, loc. cit.


FOURTEEN 139
The planetary theories of Ptolemaics and most other astronomers .. .
seemed ... to present no small difficulty. For these theories were not
adequate unless certain equants were also conceived; it then appeared
that a planet moved with uniform velocity neither along its own
deferent nor relative to an actual centre.... Having become aware of
these defects I often considered whether there could perhaps be
found a more reasonable arrangement of circles from which every
apparent inequality could be derived and in which everything would
move uniformly about its proper centre as the rule of accomplished
motion requires. ...
Vv
P
Pe A
The critique of Copernicus concerns the following model that was
used for calculating the longitudes of Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. The
planet P moves ona small circle, the epicycle, whose centre is located
on a larger circle, the deferent. The centre of the epicycle proceeds
with constant angular velocity with respect to E, the equant point.
The planet is observed from the earth T. E and T are on opposite
sides of the centre of the deferent, having the same distance from it.
Copernicus does not question the empirical adequacy of the
model. On the contrary, he admits that the planetary theories of the
Ptolemaeans and others are Лconsistent with the numerical dataС.®
Nor does he believe that these data are in need of correction. Instead
of introducing new observations he emphasizes that
—____
8. Rosen, op. cit., p. 59.


140 AGAINST METHOD

we must follow in their [the ancient GreeksС] footsteps and hold fast to

their observations bequeathed to us like an inheritance. And if anyone

on the contrary thinks that the ancients are untrustworthy in this

regard, surely the gates of this art are closed to him.?

Neither new observations nor the inability of Ptolemy to take care of
what was known to him are the reason for CopernicusС discomfort.
The difficulty he perceives lies elsewhere.

In his account Copernicus distinguishes between absolute
motions and apparent motions. The second inequality of planetary
motion, i.e. the fact that a planet may run ahead in its path and then
reverse its direction, is ЛapparentС — it must be reduced to other
motions. According to Copernicus these other motions are motions
on centred circles with a constant angular velocity around the centre.
Ptolemy violates the condition; he uses equants. Equants explain
apparent motions not by true motions but again by apparent motions
where the planet Лmoves with uniform velocity neither along its own
deferent, nor relative to an actual centre. ...С For Copernicus (and for
many other astronomers) real motion is a circular motion around a
centre with constant angular velocity.'°

Copernicus removes excentre and equant and replaces them by
epicycles.'С In the Ptolemaic scheme each planet has now three
epicycles: the old epicycle and two further epicycles for replacing the
ecentric and the equant.

In order to avoid this accumulation of epicycles (which occasionally pushed the planets far out into space) Copernicus looks for
a different explanation of the second inequality. He is helped by the
fact that the second inequality agrees with the position of the sun.!Ф
It can therefore be interpreted as an apparent motion created by a
real (and, of course, circular) motion on part of the earth.

The argument as reconstructed so far (after Krafft) contains two

9. Letter Against Werner, in Rosen, op. cit. p. 99.

10. Erasmus Reinhold wrote on the title page of his personal copy of de
Revolutionibus: Axioma Astronomicum: Motus coelestis aequalis est et circularis vel x
aequalibus et circularibus compositus. Quoted from Westman, ЛThe Melanchthon
CircleС, op. cit., p. 176.

11. This is true of the Commentariolus. In his main work he again uses excentric
deferents. Only the equant is replaced by an epicycle. This Лliberation from the equantФ
(Erasmus Reinhold), also in lunar theory, greatly impressed some of CopernicusС
admirers who paid no attention to his new cosmology and the motion of the earth.
Westman, ЛThe Melanchthon Circle, op. cit., pp. 175, 177.

12. The mean sun in Copemicus. Kepler effects a reduction to the true sun and
thereby strengthens the Copernican arrangement.


FOURTEEN 141
elements; a purely formal element and a reality assertion. Formally it
is requested that any periodic motion be reduced to centred circular
motions. The request is connected with the assumption that
inequalities are apparent while circular motions alone are real. Let us
call this the first reality assumption. But Copernicus also discovered
that his procedure allowed him to incorporate every planetary path
into a system, containing the Лlarge circleС, the circle of the earth, as
an absolute measure. ЛAll these phenomenaС, Copernicus writes in
his main work,!> Лare connected with one another in a most noble
way, as if by a golden chain, and each planet with its position and
order is a witness that the earth moves while we, who live on the
terrestrial globe, failing to recognize its motion, ascribe all sorts of
motions to the planets.С It is this inner connectedness of all parts of
the planetary system that convinced Copernicus of the reality of the
motion of the earth. I call this the seaond reality assumption.

The first reality assumption was part of the Platonic tradition;
Aristotle gave it a physical basis. The second reality assumption
conflicted with Aristotelian physics and cosmology. Aristotle had
already criticized an earlier (Pythagorean) version of it: mathematical
harmonies, which are abstractions, reflect truth only if they agree
with well-confirmed physical principles. This is a reasonable
request; it was used in our own century to reject SchroedingerСs
interpretation of wave mechanics. It is reasonable especially for those
thinkers who regard mathematics as an auxiliary science that may
describe but cannot constitute physical processes. It is unreasonable
for a Platonist or a Pythagorean. The resulting clash between two
interpretations of the nature of mathematical statements played an
important role in the ЛCopernican RevolutionС.

Copernicus strengthened the second reality assumption by
referring to traditions such as the Hermetic tradition and the idea of
the exceptional role of the sun'* and by showing how it could be
reconciled with the phenomena. He made two assumptions. First,
that the motion of a body is appropriate to its shape. The earth is
spherical, hence its motion must be circular. Secondly, objects such
as stone stay with the hody (the earth) from which they were

13. De Revol., Preface to Pope Paul. Krafft assumes that Copernicus discovered
this harmony in the course of his attempts toremove the equant and only later turned it
into a fundamental argument in favour of a real motion of the earth.

|4, The phrase Лand in the middle stands the sunС was not new. In the older
astronomy the sun was indeed in the middle of the planets, with Mars, Jupiter and
ЛSaturn standing above it, and Venus, Mercury and the moon below. It also ЛruledС the
Planets in the sense that its motion was mirrored in the motions ofall planets (the moon
excepted). Cf. eg. Macrobius, Somnium Scipionis.


142 AGAINST METHOD

separated — hence the falling stone stays close to the tower.
According to Aristotle the natural motion of objects, i.e. the upward
motion of fire and the downward motion of stones, was determined
by the structure of space (central symmetry). According to Copernicus it is determined by the distribution of matter.Copernicus
Лsaves phenomenaС such as the free fall of heavy bodies but provides
neither independent arguments nor strict laws that could lead to a
detailed comparison. His procedure is ad hoc. This does not mean
that it is bad; it only means that it cannot be reconciled with the
leading methodologies of today.

My second example is Michael Maestlin, KeplerСs teacher. Maestlin
was an expert astronomer and his judgement was generally
respected. He Лonly reluctantly abandonedС the Ptolemaic distribution of the spheres — but he was forced to do so by circumstances
beyond his control.'® As far as we can see, the circumstances were,
first, the nova of 1572. Maestlin observed it, measured its parallax
and put it beyond the sphere of the moon into the sphere of the fixed
stars. The first part (beyond the moon) followed for Maestlin from
the missing parallax, the second part (fixed stars) from the absence of
any proper motion. According to Copernicus, whose ideas Maestlin
used at this point, a planet moves more slowly the greater its distance
from the sun. Observing the changes of colour and brightness
Maestlin (and Tycho who saw the new star on the way to his
alchemical laboratory) inferred that the region above the moon
cannot be without change, as Aristotle had assumed. However, it
would be rash to conclude that Maestlin (and Tycho) regarded the
nova as a Лblow against the peripatetic philosophyС.'® Many Church
people, Theodore Beza among them, regarded the phenomenon as a
return of the star of Bethlehem, i.e. as a supernatural event.'Ф Tycho
thought this comparison too modest; here, he said, is the greatest
miracle since the beginning of the world, comparable at least to
JoshuaСs stopping of the sun.'® This means that as far as Tycho was
concerned miracles refuted the idea of the autonomy of the laws of

15. In what follows | am using the dissertation by R.A. Jarrell, TheLife and Scientific
Work of the Tuebingen Astronomer Michael Meestlin, Toronto, 1972, as well as R.S.
Westman, ЛMichael MaestlinСs Adoption of the Copernican TheoryС, Colloquia
Copemicana WV, Ossilineum, 1975, p. 53ff.

16. Jarrell, op. cit, p. 108.

17. Cf. the literature in P.H. Kocher, Science and Religion in Elizabethan England,
New York, 1969, pp. 174f, footnotes 12 and 13. Cf. also Vol. vi, Chapter »0odi of Lynn
ЛThomdike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science, New York, 1941.

18. Progymnasmata, p. 548.


FOURTEEN 143
nature (which was an Aristotelian idea), they did not refute specific
laws. Maestlin, on the other hand, being perhaps more sceptical
about miracles, may indeed have regarded the case as a Лblow againstС
Aristotle.

The next question is how serious a blow it was for him. The idea of
a permanent heaven was part of cosmology and contained the special
hypothesis of a fifth element. The falsehood of this hypothesis
impaired neither the remaining laws of motion nor the tower
argument. Both Clavius and Tycho accepted a changing heaven!?
but still used the tower argument to exclude the motion of the earth.
If MaestlinСs doubts reached further then this was due either to an
idiosyncratic interpretation of the Aristotelian doctrines, or to
personal inclinations towards a non-Aristotelian world-view. It
seems that we must assume the latter.

The next decisive event on MaestlinСs journey towards Copernicus
was the comet of 1577. Again Maestlin, prompted by Лnumerous
observationsС, puts the comet into the superlunar region.Ф° The idea
that this region is free from change has now definitely been dropped.

Maestlin also tried to determine the trajectory of the comet. He
found it to be moving in the path of Venus as described in Book 6,
Chapter 12 of de Revolutionibus. Somewhat hesitatingly he now
accepts the Copernican ordering of the spheres.Ф' But, so he adds,
he was forced to do so Лby extreme necessityС.2

This Лextreme necessityС arises only when geometrical considerations are given the force of cosmological arguments. Many years later
Galileo cautioned against this way of reasoning: rainbows, he said,
cannot be caught by triangulation. Maestlin had no such doubts. He
accepted the traditional distinction between physics and astronomy
and identified astronomy with mathematics: ЛCopernicus wrote his
entire book not as a physicist, but as an astronomerС is his comment
on the margin of his copy of de Revolutionibus.Ф> He then interpreted
the results of mathematical arguments by using the second reality
assumption. This means that he did not overcome an Aristotelian
resistance against such an interpretation, he acted as if such a
resistance did not exist. ЛThis argumentС, he wrote in his marginal
notes,Ф* Лis wholly in accord with reason. Such is the arrangement of
—___

19. For Clavius cf. his commentary on SacroboscoСs sphere, 1593 edition, pp.
210f. Cf. also Westfall, op. cit,, p. 44.

20. Jarrell, op. cit,, p. 112.

21. Ibid, p. 117.

22. Ibid., p. 120.

23. Westman, op. cit., p. 59.

24. Ibid.


144 AGAINST METHOD

this entire, immense machina that it permits surer demonstrations,
indeed, the entire universe revolves in such a way that nothing can be
transposed without confusion of its [parts] and, hence, by means of
these [surer demonstrations] all the phenomena of motion can be
demonstrated most exactly, for nothing unfitting occurs in the course
of their orbits.С Kepler too became a Copernican because of this
harmony and because of the comet, the interesting fact being that
MaestlinСs calculations of the path of the comet contain serious
mistakes; it did not move in the orbit of Venus.

Now let us compare these events and the situations in which they
occur with some once popular philosophies of science. We notice at
once that none of these philosophies considers all the disciplines that
contributed to the debate. Astronomy is in the centre. A rational
reconstruction of the developments in this area is thought to be a
rational reconstruction of the Copernican Revolution itself. The role
of physics (the tower argument), the fact that theology occasionally
formed a strong boundary condition (cf. TychoСs reaction to his nova
and to the idea of the motion of the earth) and the role of different
mathematical philosophies shows that this cannot possibly be true.
This fatal incompleteness is the first and most fundamental objection
against all reconstructions that have been offered. They still depend
on the (positivistic) prejudice that observations alone decide a case
and that they can judge a theory all by themselves, without any help
(or hindrance) from alternatives, metaphysical alternatives included.
Moreover, they even fail in the narrow domain they have chosen for
reconstruction, viz. astronomy. To show this, let us consider the
following accounts:

1. Nasve empiricism: the Middle Ages read the Bible and never
looked at the sky. Then people suddenly looked upwards and found
that the world was different from the opinion of the schools.

This account has disappeared from astronomy — but its analogue
survives in other areas (for example, in some parts of the history of
medicine). The main argument against it is that Aristotle was an arch
empiricist and that Ptolemy used carefully collected data.Ф

2. Sophisticated empiricism: new observations forced astronomers
to modify an already empirical doctrine.

25. ЛCarefullyС has been contested by R.R. Newton, The Crime of Claudius Ptolemy,
Baltimore, 1977. Newton shows that many of PtolemyСs ЛdataС were manufactured to fit
his model. For his optics this has been known for along time.


FOURTEEN 145

This certainly is not true for Copernicus and his followers in the
16th century. As we have seen, Copernicus thought the Ptolemaic
system to be empirically adequate — he criticized it for theoretical
reasons. And his ЛobservationsС are essentially those of Ptolemy, as he
says himself.

Modern comparisons of Copernican and Ptolemaic predictions
Лwith the factsС, i.e. with 19th- and 20th-century calculations, show,
furthermore, that empirical predictions were not improved and
actually become worse when the competing systems are restricted to
the same number of parameters.°

The only new observations made were those of Tycho Brahe — but
they already led beyond Copernicus to Kepler. GalileoСs observations belong to cosmology, not to astronomy. They lend plausibility to
some of CopernicusС analogies. A compelling proof of the motion of the
earth did not emerge, however, for the Galilean observations could
also be accommodated by the Tychonian system.

3. Falsificationism: new observations refuted important assumptions of the old astronomy and led to the invention of a new one. This
is not correct for Copernicus and the domain of astronomy (see
above, comments on 2). The ЛrefutationС of the immutability of the
heavens was neither compelling nor decisive for the problem of the
motion of the earth. Besides, the idea of the motion of the earth was
in big trouble or, if you will, ЛrefutedС. It could survive only if it was
treated with kindness. But if it could be treated with kindness, then so
could the older system.

We see here very clearly how misguided it is to try reducing the
process ЛCopernican RevolutionС to a single principle, such as the
principle of falsification. Falsifications played a role just as new
observations played a role. But both were imbedded in a complex
pattern of events which contained tendencies, attitudes, and
considerations of an entirely different nature.

4. Conventionalism: the old astronomy became more and more
complicated — so it was in the end replaced by a simpler theory. It is
this assumption that led to the mocking remark of the Лepicyclical

26. Stanley E. Babb, ЛAccuracy of Planetary Theories, Particularly for MarsС, /sis,
Sep. 1977, pp. 426ff. Cf. also the earlier article of Derek de Solla Price, ЛContra
CopernicusС, in M. Clagett (ed.), Critical Problems of the History of Science, Madison,
1989, pp. 197ff; N.R. Hanson, /sis, No. 51, 1960, pp. 1 5Offas well as Owen Gingerich,
ЛCrisis vs Aesthetics in the Copernican RevolutionС, in Beer (ed), Vistas in Astronomy,
Vol. 17, 1974. Gingerich compares the Лables of Stoeffler, Stadius, Maestlin, Magini
and Origanus and finds all of them beset by errors of roughly the same magnitude
(though not of the same distribution along the ecliptic).


146 AGAINST METHOD
degenerationС. The theory overlooks the fact that the Copernican
scheme has about as many circles as the Ptolemaic one.ФФ

5. The theory of crises: astronomy was in a crisis. The crisis led to a
revolution which brought about the triumph of the Copernican
system.

The answer here is the same as under 2: empirically there was no
crisis and no crisis was resolved. A crisis did occur in cosmology, but
only after the idea of the motion of the earth received a serious
hearing. The many complaints about the inexactness of astronomical
predictions that preceded Copernicus (Regiomontanus, for example)
criticized the lack of precise initial conditions and accurate tables, not
basic theory, and such a criticism would have been quite unjust, as
the later examination of these theories shows.Ф

27. The reader should consult the very instructive diagrams in de SantillanaСs
edition of GalileoСs Dialogue, Chicago, 1964.
28. Cf. footnote 26 above.


15.
The results obtained so far suggest abolishing the distinction between a
context of discovery and a context of justification, norms and facts,
observational terms and theoretical terms. None of these distinctions plays a
role in scientific practice. Attempts to enforce them would have disastrous
consequences. PopperСs ЛcriticalС rationalism fails for the same reasons.

Let us now use the material of the preceding sections to throw light
on the following features of contemporary empiricism: (1) the
distinctions between a context of discovery and a context of
justification — norms and facts, observational terms and theoretical
terms; (2) PopperСs ЛcriticalС rationalism, (3) the problem of
incommensurability. The last problem will lead us back to the
problem of rationality and order vs anarchism, which is the main
topic of this essay.

One of the objections which may be raised against my attempt to
draw methodological conclusions from historical examples is that it
confounds two contexts which are essentially distinct, viz. a context of
discovery, and a context of justification. Discovery may be irrational
and need not follow any recognized method. Justification, on the
other hand, or — to use the Holy Word of a different school — criticism,
starts only after the discoveries have been made, and it proceeds in an
orderly way. ЛIt is one thing,С writes Herbert Feigl, Лto retrace the
historical origins, the psychological genesis and development, the
socio-political-economic conditions for the acceptance or rejection
of scientific theories; and it is quite another thing to provide a logical
Teconstruction of the conceptual structure and of the testing of
scientific theories.С' These are indeed two different things, especially
as they are done by two different disciplines (history of science,
Philosophy of science), which are quite jealous of their independence. But the question is not what distinctions a fertile mind can
—____

1. ЛThe Orthodox View of Theories, in Radner—Winokur (eds), Analyses of
Theories and Methods of Physics and Psychology, Minneapolis, 1970, p. 4.


148 AGAINST METHOD

dream up when confronted with a complex process, or how some
homogeneous material may be subdivided; the question is to what
extent the distinction drawn reflects a real difference and whether
science can advance without a strong interaction between the
separated domains. (A river may be subdivided by national
boundaries but this does not make it a discontinuous entity.) Now
there is, of course, a very noticeable difference between the rules of
testing as ЛreconstructedС by philosophers of science and the
procedures which scientists use in actual research. This difference is
apparent to the most superficial examination. On the other hand, a
most superficial examination also shows that a determined application of the methods of criticism and proof which are said to belong to
the context of justification would wipe out science as we know it —
and would never have permitted it to arise.Ф Conversely, the fact
that science exists proves that these methods were frequently overruled. They were overruled by procedures which belong to the
context of discovery. Thus the attempt Лto retrace the historical
origins, the psychological genesis and development, the sociopolitical-economic conditions for the acceptance or rejection of
scientific theoriesС, far from being irrelevant for the standards of test,
actually leads to a criticism of these standards — provided the two
domains, historical research and discussion of test procedures, are
not kept apart by fiat.

In another paper Feigl repeats his arguments and adds some
further points. He is Лastonished that ... scholars such as N.R.
Hanson, Thomas Kuhn, Michael Polanyi, Paul Feyerabend,
Sigmund Koch et a/., consider the distinction as invalid or at least
misleadingС.? And he points out that neither the psychology of
invention nor any similarity, however great, between the sciences and
the arts can show that it does not exist. In this he is certainly right.
Even the most surprising stories about the manner in which scientists
arrive at their theories cannot exclude the possibility that they
proceed in an entirely different way once they have found them. But
this possibility is never realized. Inventing theories and contemplating le)
them in a relaxed and ЛartisticС fashion, scientists often make moves
that are forbidden by methodological rules. For example, they
interpret the evidence so that it fits their fanciful ideas, eliminate
difficulties by ad hoc procedures, push them aside, or simply refuse to
take them seriously. The activities which according to Feig] belong to

2. Cf. the examples in Chapter 5.

3. ЛEmpiricism at BayС, MS, 1972, p. 2.


FIFTEEN 149
the context of discovery are, therefore, not just different from what
philosophers say about justification, they are in conflict with it.
Scientific practice does not contain two contexts moving side by side, it
is a complicated mixture of procedures and we are faced by the
question if this mixture should be left as it is, or if it should be
replaced by a more ЛorderlyС arrangement. This is part one of the
argument. Now we have seen that science as we know it today could
not exist without a frequent overruling of the context of justification.
This is part two of the argument. The conclusion is clear. Part one
showsthat we do not have a difference, but a mixture. Part two shows
that replacing the mixture by an order that contains discovery on one
side and justification on the other would have ruined science: we are
dealing with a uniform practice all of whose ingredients are equally
important for the growth of science. This disposes of the distinction.

A similar argument applies to the ritual distinction between
methodological prescriptions and historical descriptions. Methodology,
it is said, deals with what should be done and cannot be criticized by
reference to what is. But we must of course make sure that our
prescriptions have a point of attack in the historical material, and we
must also make sure that their determined application leads to
desirable results. We make sure by considering (historical, sociological, physical, psychological, etc.) tendencies and laws which tell us
what is possible and what is not possible under the given circumstances and thus separate feasible prescriptions from those which are
going to lead into dead ends. Again, progress can be made only if the
distinction between the ought and the is is regarded as a temporary
device rather than as a fundamental boundary line.

A distinction which once may have hada point but which has now
definitely lost it is the distinction between observational terms and
theoretical terms. It is now generally admitted that this distinction is
not as sharp as it was thought to be only a few decades ago. It is also
admitted, in complete agreement with NeurathСs original views, that
both theories and observations can be abandoned: theories may be
removed because of conflicting observations, observations may be
removed for theoretical reasons. Finally, we have discovered that
learning does not go from observation to theory but always involves
both elements. Experience arises together with theoretical assumptions not before them, and an experience without theory is just as
incomprehensible as is (allegedly) a theory without experience: (e)
eliminate part of the theoretical knowledge of a sensing subject and
you have a person who is completely disoriented and incapable of
Carrying outthe simplest action. Eliminate further knowledge and his
Sensory world (his Лobservation languageС) will start disintegrating,


150 AGAINST METHOD

colours and other simple sensations will disappear until he is in a
stage even more primitive than a small child. A small child, on the
other hand, does not possess a stable perceptual world which he uses
for making sense of the theories put before him. Quite the contrary —
he passes through various perceptual stages which are only loosely
connected with each other (earlier stages disappear when new stages
take over — see Chapter 16) and which embody all the theoretical 6
knowledge available at the time. Moreover, the whole process starts
only because the child reacts correctly towards signals, interprets them
correctly, because he possesses means of interpretation even before he
has experienced his first clear sensation.
ee
will deny that the sentences of science can be classified into long
sentences and short sentences, or that its statements can be classified
into those which are intuitively obvious and others which are not.
Nobody will deny that such distinctions can be made. But nobody will
put great weight on them, or will even mention them, for they do not
now play any decistve role in the business of science. (This was not always
so. Intuitive plausibility, for example, was once thought to be a most
important guide to the truth; it disappeared from methodology the
very moment intuition was replaced by experience, and by formal
considerations.) Does experience play such a role? It does not, as we
have seen. Yet the inference that the distinction between theory and
observation has now ceased to be relevant, is either not drawn or is
explicitly rejected.* Let us take a step forward and let us abandon
this last trace of dogmatism in science!
Se
therefore, look a little more closely at the critical standards which,
according to some, constitute the content of a ЛrationalС argument.
More especially, let us look at the standards of the Popperian school,

4. ЛNeurath fails to give ... rules [which distinguish empirical statements from

others] and thus unwittingly throws empiricism overboardС, K.R. Popper, The Logic of
ЛScientific Discovery, New York and London, 1959, p. 97.


FIFTEEN 151
which are still being taken seriously in the more backward regions of
knowledge. This will prepare us for the final step in our discussion of
the issue between law-and-order methodologies and anarchism in
science.

Some readers of my arguments in the above text have pointed out
that PopperСs ЛcriticalС rationalism is sufficiently liberal to accommodate the developments I have described. Now critical rationalism
is either a meaningful idea or it is a collection of slogans that can be
adapted to any situation.

In the first case it must be possible to produce rules, standards,
restrictions which permit us to separate critical behaviour (thinking,
singing, writing of plays) from other types of behaviour so that we can
discover irrational actions and correct them with the help of concrete
suggestions. It is not difficult to produce the standards of rationality
defended by the Popperian school.

These standards are standards of criticism: rational discussion
consists in the attempt to criticize, and not in the attempt to prove or
to make probable. Every step that protects a view from criticism, that
makes it safe or Лwell-foundedС, is a step away from rationality.
Every step that makes it more vulnerable is welcome. In addition,
it is recommended to abandon ideas which have been found wanting and it is forbidden to retain them in the face of strong and
successful criticism unless one can present suitable counterarguments. Develop your ideas so that they can be criticized;
attack them relentlessly; do not try to protect them, but exhibit
their weak spots; eliminate them as soon as such weak spots have
become manifest — these are some of the rules put forth by our
critical rationalists.

These rules become more definite and more detailed when we
turn to the philosophy of science and, especially, to the philosophy of
the natural sciences.

Within the natural sciences, criticism is connected with experiment and observations. The content of a theory consists in the sum
total of those basic statements which contradict it; it is the class of its
potential falsifiers. Increased content means increased vulnerability,
hence theories oflarge content are to be preferred to theories of small
content. Increase of content is welcome, decrease of content is to be
avoided. A theory that contradicts an accepted basic statement must
be given up. Ad hoc hypotheses are forbidden — and so on. A science,
however, that accepts the rules of a critical empiricism of this kind
will develop in the following manner.

We start with a problem, such as the problem of the planets at the
time of Plato. This problem (which I shall discuss in a somewhat


152 AGAINST METHOD

idealized form) is not merely the result of curiosity, it is a theoretical
result. It is due to the fact that certain expectations have been
disappointed: on the one hand it seems to be clear that the stars must
be divine, hence one expects them to behave in an orderly and lawful
manner. On the other hand, one cannot find any easily discernible
regularity. The planets, to all intents and purposes, move in a quite
chaotic fashion. How can this fact be reconciled with the expectation
and with the principles that underlie the expectation? Does it show
that the expectation is mistaken? Or have we failed in our analysis of
the facts? This is the problem.

It is important to see that the elements of the problem are not
simply given. The ЛfactС of irregularity, for example, is not accessible
without further ado. It cannot be discovered by just anyone who has
healthy eyes and a good mind. It is only through a certain expectation
that it becomes an object of our attention. Or, to be more accurate,
this fact of irregularity exists because there is an expectation of
regularity and because there are ideas which define what it means to
be ЛregularС. After all, the term ЛirregularityС makes sense only if we
havea rule. In our case the rule that defines regularity asserts circular
motion with constant angular velocity. The fixed stars agree with this
Tule and so does the sun, if we trace its path relative to the fixed stars.
The planets do not obey the rule, neither directly, with respect to the
earth, nor indirectly, with respect to the fixed stars.

(In the problem we are examining now the rule is formulated
explicitly and it can be discussed. This is not always the case.
Recognizing a colour as red is made possible by deep-lying
patterns concerning the structure of our surroundings and recognition does not occur when these patterns cease to exist.)

Лdegree larger than any alternative), but not yet falsified. In the case
mentioned above (planets at the time of Plato), the problem is: to find
circular motions of constant angular velocity for the purpose of saving
the planetary phenomena. A first solution was provided by Eudoxos
and then by Heracleides of Pontos.

Next comes the criticism of the theory that has been put forth in the


FIFTEEN 153
new
theory old theory
successes failures of the
of the old | old theory (part
theory of the falsity
(part of content of the
additional the truth | new theory)
predictions of the new
theory)
attempt to solve the problem. Successful criticism removes the
theory once and for all and creates a new problem, viz. to explain (a)
why the theory was successful so far; (b) why it failed. Trying to solve
this problem we need a new theory that reproduces the successful
consequences of the older theory, denies its mistakes and makes
additional predictions not made before. These are some of the formal
conditions which a suitable successor of a refuted theory must satisfy.
Adopting the conditions, one proceeds by conjecture and refutation
from less general theories to more general theories and expands the
content of human knowledge.

More and more facts are discovered (or constructed with the help of
expectations) and are then explained by theories. There is no
guarantee that scientists will solve every problem and replace every
theory that has been refuted with a successor satisfying the formal
conditions. The invention of theories depends on our talents and
other fortuitous circumstances such as a satisfactory sex life. But as
long as these talents hold out, the enclosed scheme is a correct
account of the growth ofa knowledge that satisfies the rules of critical
rationalism.

Now at this point, one may raise two questions.

2. Isitpossibleto havebotha science as we know itand these rules?

As far as I am concerned, the first question is far more important
than the second. True, science and related institutions play an
important part in our culture, and they occupy the centre of interest
for many philosophers (most philosophers are opportunists). Thus


154 AGAINST METHOD

the ideas of the Popperian school were obtained by generalizing
solutions for methodological and epistemological problems. Critical
rationalism arose from the attempt to understand the Einsteinian
revolution, and it was then extended to politics and even to the
conduct of oneСs private life. Such a procedure may Satisfy a school
philosopher, who looks at life through the spectacles of his own
technical problems and recognizes hatred, love, happiness, only to
the extent to which they occur in these problems. But if we consider
human interests and, above all, the question of human freedom
(freedom from hunger, despair, from the tyranny of constipated
systems of thought and not the academic Лfreedom of the willС), then
we are proceeding in the worst possible fashion.

For is it not possible that science as we know it today, or a
Лsearch for the truthС in the style of traditional philosophy, will
create a monster? Is it not possible that an objective approach that
frowns upon personal connections between the entities examined
will harm people, turn them into miserable, unfriendly, selfrighteous mechanisms without charm and humour? ЛIs it not
possible,С asks Kierkegaard, Лthat my activity as an objective [or a
critico-rational] observer of nature will weaken my strength as a
human being?Ф I suspect the answer to many of these questions is
affirmative and I believe that a reform of the sciences that makes
them more anarchic and more subjective (in KierkegaardСs sense) is
urgently needed.

But these are not the problems I want to discuss now. In the
present essay I shall restrict myself to the second question and I shall
ask: is it possible to have both a science as we know it and the rules of
a critical rationalism as just described? And to this question the
answer seems to be a firm and resounding NO.

To start with we have seen, though rather briefly, that the actual
development of institutions, ideas, practices, and so on, often does not
start from a problem but rather from some extraneous activity, such as
playing, which, as a side effect, leads to developments which later on
can be interpreted as solutions to unrealized problems.° Are such \e
developments to be excluded? And, if we do exclude them, will this
not considerably reduce the number of our adaptive reactions and the
quality of our learning process?

5. Papirer, ed. Heiberg, VII, Pt. I, sec. A, No. 182. Mill tries to show how scientific
method can be understood as part of a theory of man and thus gives a positive answer to
the question raised by Kierkegaard; cf. footnote 2 to Chapter 4.

6. Cf. the brief comments on the relation between idea and action in Chapter 1.
For details cf. footnotes 31 ff of ЛAgainst MethodС, Minnesota Studies, Vol. 4, 1970.


FIFTEEN ISS

Secondly, we have seen, in Chapters 8-14, that a strict principle of
Лfalsification, or a Лnaive falsificationismС as Lakatos calls it,Ф would
wipe out science as we know it and would never have permitted it to
start.

The demand for increased content is not satisfied either. Theories
which effect the overthrow of a comprehensive and well-entrenched
point of view, and take over after its demise, are initially restricted toa
fairly narrow domain of facts, to a series of paradigmatic phenomena
which lend them support, and they are only slowly extended to other
areas, This can be seen from historical examples (foomote 12 of
Chapter 8), and it is also plausible on general grounds: trying to
develop a new theory, we must first take a step back from the evidence
and reconsider the problem of observation (this was discussed in
Chapter 11). Later on, of course, the theory is extended to other
domains; but the mode of extension is only rarely determined by the
elements that constitute the content of its predecessors. (The slowly
emerging conceptual apparatus of the theory soon starts defining its
own problems, and earlier problems, facts, and observations are either
forgotten or pushed aside as irrelevant. This is an entirely natural
development, and quite unobjectionable. For why should an ideology
be constrained by older problems which, at any rate, make sense only
in the abandoned context and which look silly and unnatural now? 6
Why should it even consider the factsС that gave rise to problems of
this kind or played a role in their solutions? Why should it not rather
proceed in its own way, devisingits own tasks and assembling its own
domain of ЛfactsС? A comprehensive theory, after all, is supposed to
contain also an ontology that determines what exists and thus delimits
the domain of possible facts and possible questions. The development of science agrees with these considerations. New views soon
strike out in new directions and frown upon the older problems (what
is the base upon which the earth rests? what is the specific weight of
phlogiston? what is the absolute velocity of the earth?) and the older
facts (most of the facts described in the Malleus Maleficarum — Chapter
8, foomote 2 — the facts of Voodoo — Chapter 4, footnote 8 — the
Properties of phlogiston or those of the ether) which so much
exercised the minds of earlier thinkers. And where they do pay
attention to preceding theories, they try to accommodate their factual
core in the manner already described, with the help of ad hoc
hypotheses, ad hoc approximations, redefinition of terms, or by simply

7. ЛFalsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research ProgrammesС, in
Lakatos~Musgrave (eds), Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, Cambridge, 1970,
Pp. 93ff. (ЛNaive falsificationismС is here also called ЛdogmaticС.)


156 AGAINST METHOD
asserting, without any more detailed study of the matter, that the core
Лfollows fromС the new basic principles.® They are Лgrafted on to
older programmes with which they [are] blatantly inconsistentС.?
The result of all these procedures is an interesting epistemological
illusion: the imagined content of the earlier theories (which is the
intersection of the remembered consequences of these theories with
the newly recognized domain of problems and facts) shrinks and may
decrease to such an extent that it becomes smaller than the imagined
content of the new ideologies (which are the actual consequences of
these ideologies p/us all those ЛfactsС, laws, principles which are tied to
them by ad hoc hypotheses, ad hoc approximations or by the say-so of
some influential physicist or philosopher of science — and which
properly belong to the predecessor). Comparing the old and the new
it thus appears that the relation of empirical contents is like this
new
or, perhaps, like this
admittedly
unexplained
part of old theory
while in actual fact it is much more like this
old
theory
new theory
8. ЛEinsteinСs theory is better than ... NewtonСs theory anno 1916 ... becouse it
explained everything that NewtonСs theory had successfully explained ...С, Lakatos,
op.cit., p. 214.
9. Lakatos, discussing Copernicus and Bohr, ibid,, p. 143.


FIFTEEN 157
domain D representing the problems and facts of the old theory
which are still remembered and which have been distorted so as to fit
into the new framework. It is this illusion which is responsible for the
persistent survival of the demand for increased content. yo

Finally, we have by now seen quite distinctly the need for ad hoc
hypotheses: ad hoc hypotheses and ad hoc approximations create a
tentative area of contact between ЛfactsС and those parts of a new view
which seem capable of explaining them, at some time in the future
and after addition of much further material. They specify possible
explananda and explanatia, and thus determine the direction of
future research. They may have to be retained forever if the new
framework is partly unfinished (this happened in the case of the
quantum theory, which needs the classical concepts to turn it into a
complete theory). Or they are incorporated into the new theory as
theorems, leading to a redefinition of the basic terms of the
proceeding ideology (this happened in the cases of Galileo and of the
theory of relativity). The demand that the truth-content of the earlier
theory as concetved while the earlier theory reigned supreme be included
in the truth-content of the successor is violated in either case.

To sum up: wherever we look, whatever examples we consider, we
see that the principles of critical rationalism (take falsifications
seriously; increase content; avoid ad hoc hypotheses; Лbe honestС —
whatever that means; and so on) and, a fortiori, the principles of
logical empiricism (be precise; base your theories on measurements;
avoid vague and untestable ideas; and so on), though practised
in special areas, give an inadequate account of the past development
of science as a whole and are liable to hinder it in the future. They give
an inadequate account of science because science is much) moré

10) This illusion is the core of Elie ZaharСs excellent paper on the development
from Lorentz to Einstein. According to Zahar, Einstein superseded Lorentz with the
explanation of the perihelion of Mercury (1915). But in 1915 nobody had as yet
succeeded in giving a relativistic account of classical perturbation theory to the degree
of approximation reached by Laplace and Poincaré, and the implicationsof Lorentz on
the atomic level (electron theory of metals) were not accounted for either, but were
Bradually replaced by the quantum theory: Lorentz was ЛsupersededС not by one, but by
at least two different and mutually incommensurable programmes. Lakatos, in
his excellent reconstruction of the development of the research programme of
Copernicus from the Commentariolus to the De Revol., notes progressive changes but
only because he omits the dynamical and the optical problems and concentrates on
kinematics, pure and simple. Small wonderthat both Zahar and Lakatosare under the
impression that the content condition is still satisfied. Cf. my short note ЛZahar on
EinsteinС, in the British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, March 1974 as well as R.N.
Peete Special Relativity as a Stage in the Development of Quantum TheoryС,

Лcientarium, No. 34, 1988, pp. S7ff.


158 AGAINST METHOD
ЛsloppyС and ЛirrationalС than its methodological image. And they are
liable to hinder it because the attempt to make science more ЛfationalС,
Лand more precise is bound to wipe it out, as we have seen. The
Лdifference between science and methodology which is such an
Sd pethaps of the laws of reasonС as well For what appears
ЛsloppinessС, ЛchaosС or ЛopportunismС when compared with such laws
has a most important function in the development of those very.
theories which we today regard as essential parts of our knowledge of |
nature. These ЛdeviationsС, these ЛerrorsС, are preconditions of progress.
They permit knowledge to survive in the complex and difficult world
which we inhabit, they permit us to remain free and happy agents.
Without ЛchaosС, no knowledge. Without a frequent dismissal of
reason, no progress. Ideas which today form the very basis of science
exist only because there were such things as prejudice, conceit,
passion; because these things opposed reason; and because they were
permitted to have their way. We have to conclude, then, that even within
Лscience reason cannot and should not be allowed to be comprehen11. Even LakatosС ingenious methodology does not escape this indictment
Lakatos seems liberal because he forbids very little and he seems rational because he is
still forbids something. But the only thing he forbids is to describe a Лdegenerating
research programmeС, i.e. a research programme lacking in novel predictions and
cluttered with ad hoc adaptations, as progressive. He does not forbid its use. But this
means that his standards permit a criminal to commit as many crimes as he wants
Provided he never lies about them. Details in my Philosophical Papers, Vol. 2, Chaptet
10.


Appendix 1

Having listened to one of my anarchistic sermons, Professor Wigner
exclaimed: ЛBut surely, you do not read all the manuscripts which
people send you, but you throw most of them into the wastepaper
basket.С I most certainly do. ЛAnything goesС does not mean that I
shall read every single paper that has been written — God forbid! — it
means that I make my selection in a highly individual and
idiosyncratic way, partly because I canСt be bothered to read what
doesnСt interest me — and my interests change from week to week and
day to day — partly because I am convinced that humanity and even
Science will profit from everyone doing his own thing: a physicist
might prefer a sloppy and partly incomprehensible paper full of
mistakes to a crystal-clear exposition because it is a natural extension
of his own, still rather disorganized, research and he might achieve
success as well as clarity long before his rival who has vowed never to
read a single woolly line (one of the assets of the Copenhagen School
was its ability to avoid premature precision). On other occasions he
might look for the most perfect proof of a principle he is about to use
in order not to be sidetracked in the debate of what he considers to be
his main results. There are of course so-called ЛthinkersС who
subdivide their mail in exactly the same way, come rain, come
sunshine, and whoalso imitate each otherСs principles of choice — but
we shall hardly admire them for their uniformity, and we shall
certainly not think their behaviour ЛrationalС. Science needs people
who are adaptable and inventive, not rigid imitators of ЛestablishedС
behavioural patterns.

In the case of institutions and organizations such as the National
Science Foundation the situation is exactly the same. The
physiognomy of an organization and its efficiency depends on its
members and it improves with their mental and emotional agility.
Even Procter and Gamble realized that a bunch of yes-men is inferior
in competitive potential to a group of people with unusual opinions
and business has found ways of incorporating the most amazing
nonconformists into their machinery. Special problems arise with


160 AGAINST METHOD

foundations that distribute money and want to do this in a just and
reasonable way. Justice seems to demand that the allocation of funds
be carried out on the basis of standards which do not change from
one applicant to the next and which reflect the intellectual situation in
the fields to be supported. The demand can be satisfied in an ad hoc
manner without appeal to unrversal Лstandards of rationalityС: any free
association of people must respect the illusions of its members and
must give them institutional support. The illusion of rationality
becomes especially strong when a scientific institution opposes
political demands. In this case one class of standards is set against
another such class — and this is quite legitimate: each organization,
each party, each religious group has a right to defend its particular
form of life and all the standards it contains. But scientists go much
further. Like the defenders of The One True Religion before them
they insinuate that their standards are essential for arriving at the
Truth, or for getting Results and they deny such authority to the
demands of the politician. They oppose all political interference, and
they fall over each other trying to remind the listener, or the reader, of
the disastrous outcome of the Lysenko affair.

Now we have seen that the belief in a unique set of standards that
has always led to success and will always lead to success is nothing but
achimera. The theoretical authority of science is much smaller than it
is supposed to be. Its social authority, on the other hand, has by now
become so overpowering that political interference is necessary to restore a
balanced development. And to judge the effects of such interference one
must study more than one unanalysed case. One must remember
those cases where science, left to itself, committed grievous blunders
and one must not forget the instances when political interference did
improve the situation.С Such a balanced presentation of the evidence
may even convince us that the time is overdue for adding the
separation of state and science to the by now quite customary
separation of state and church. Science is only one of the many
instruments people invented to cope with their surroundings. It is not
the only one, it is not infallible and it has become too powerful, too
pushy, and too dangerous to be left on its own. Next, a word about the
practical aim rationalists want to realize with the help of their
methodology.

Rationalists are concerned aboutintellectual pollution. I share this
concern. Illiterate and incompetent books flood the market, empty
verbiage full of strange and esoteric terms claims to express profound

1. An example was discussed in the text to foomotes 9-12 of Chapter 4.


APPENDIX 1 161
insights, ЛexpertsС without brains, character, and without even a
modicum of intellectual, stylistic, emotional temperament tell us
about our ЛconditionС and the means for improving it, and they do not
only preach to us who might be able to look through them, they are let
loose on our children and permitted to drag them down into their
own intellectual squalor.Ф ЛTeachersС using grades and the fear of
failure mould the brains of the young until they have lost every ounce
of imagination they might once have possessed. This is a disastrous
situation, and one not easily mended. But I do not see how a
rationalistic methodology can help. As far as 1am concerned the first
and the most pressing problem is to get education out of the hands of
the Лprofessional educatorsС. The constraints of grades, competition,
regular examination must be removed and we must also separate the
process of learning from the preparation for a particular trade. | grant that
business, religions, special professions such as science or prostitution, have a right to demand that their participants and/or
practitioners conform to standards they regard as important, and that
they should be able to ascertain their competence. I also admit that
this implies the need for special types of education that prepare a man
or a woman for the corresponding ЛexaminationsС. The standards
taught need not be ЛrationalС or ЛreasonableС in any sense, though they
will be usually presented as such; it suffices that they are accepted by
the groups one wants to join, be it now Science, or Big Business, or
The One True Religion. After all, in a democracy ЛreasonС has just as
muchrightto be heard and to be expressed as ЛunreasonС especially in
view of the fact that one manСs ЛreasonС is the other manСs insanity.
But one thing must be avoided at all costs: the special standards
which define special subjects and special professions must not be
allowed to permeate general education and they must not be made the
defining property of a Лwell-educated personС. General education
should prepare citizens to choose between the standards, or to find their
way ina society that contains groups committed to various standards,
but it must under no condition bend their minds so that they conform to the
standards of one particular group. The standards will be considered, they
will be discussed, children will be encouraged to get proficiency in the
more important subjects, but only as one gets proficiency in a game, that
is, without serious commitment and without robbing the mind of its
ability to play other games as well. Having been prepared in this way a
Young person may decide to devote the rest of his life to a particular
profession and he may start taking it seriously forthwith. This
—____
2. Even the law now seems to support these tendences, as is shown in Peter
HuberСs GalileoСs Revenge, New York, 1991.


162 AGAINST METHOD

ЛcommitmentС should be the result of a conscious decision, on the
basis of a fairly complete knowledge of alternatives, and not a foregone
conclusion.

All this means, of course, that we must stop the scientists from
taking over education and from teaching as ЛfactС and as Лthe one true
methodС whatever the myth of the day happens to be. Agreement with
science, decision to work in accordance with the canons of science
should be the result of examination and choice, and not of a particular
way of bringing up children.

It seems to me that such a change in education and, as a result, in
perspective will remove a great deal of the intellectual pollution
rationalists deplore. The change of perspective makes it clear that
there are many ways of ordering the world that surrounds us, that the
hated constraints of one set of standards may be broken by freely
accepting standards of a different kind, and that there is no need to
reject all order and to allow oneself to be reduced to a whining stream
of consciousness. A society that is based on a set of well-defined and
restrictive rules, so that being human becomes synonymous with
obeying these rules, forces the dissenter into a no-manСs-land of no rules
at all and thus robs him of his reason and his humanity. It is the paradox
of modern irrationalism that its proponents silently identify
rationalism with order and articulate speech and thus see themselves
forced to promote stammering and absurdity - many forms of
ЛmysticismС and ЛexistentialismС are impossible without a firm but
unrealized commitment to some principles of the despised ideology
(just remember the ЛtheoryС that poetry is nothing but emotions
colourfully expressed). Remove the principles, admit the possibility
of many different forms of life, and such phenomena will disappear
like a bad dream.

My diagnosis and my suggestions coincide with those of Lakatos -
up toa point. Lakatos has identified overly-rigid rationality principles
as the source of some versions of irrationalism and he has urged us to
adopt new and more liberal standards. I have identified overly-rigid
rationality principles as well as a general respect for ЛreasonС as the
source of some forms of mysticism and irrationalism, and I also urge
the adoption of more liberal standards. But while LakatosС great
Лrespect for great scienceС? makes him look for the standards within
the confines of modern science Лof the last two centuriesС,* I
recommend to put science in its place as an interesting but by no
means exclusive form of knowledge that has many advantages but

3. ЛHistoryС, p. 113.

4. ibid, p. 111.


APPENDIX | 163
also many drawbacks: ЛAlthough science taken as a whole is a
nuisance, one can still learn from itФ° Also I donСt believe that
charlatans can be banned just by tightening up rules.

Charlatans have existed at all times and in the most tightly-knit
professions. Some of the examples which Lakatos mentions® seem
to indicate that the problem is created by too much control and not by
too little.С This is especially true of the new ЛrevolutionariesС and
their ЛreformС of the universities. Their fault is that they are Puritans
and not that they are libertines.® Besides, who would expect that
cowards will improve the intellectual climate more readily than will
libertines? (Einstein saw this problem and he therefore advised
people not to connect their research with their profession: research
has to be free from the pressures which professions are likely to
impose.°) We must also remember that those rare cases where liberal
methodologies do encourage empty verbiage and loose thinking
(ЛlooseС from one point of view, though perhaps not from another)
may be inevitable in the sense that the guilty liberalism is also a
precondition of a free and humane life.

Finally, let me repeat that for me the chauvinism of science is a
much greater problem than the problem of intellectual pollution. It
may even be one of its major causes. Scientists are not content with
running their own playpens in accordance with what they regard as
the rules of scientific method, they want to universalize these rules,
they want them to become part of society at large and they use every
means at their disposal — argument, propaganda, pressure tactics,
intimidation, lobbying - to achieve their aims. The Chinese
Communists recognized the dangers inherent in this chauvinism and
they proceeded to remove it. In the process they restored important
parts of the intellectual and emotional heritage of the Chinese people
and they also improved the practice of medicineС. It would be of
advantage if other governments followed suit.

5. Gottfried Benn, letter to Gert Micha Simon of 11 October 1949, quoted from
Gottfried Benn, Lynik und Prosa, Briefe und Dokumente, Wiesbaden, 1962, p. 235.

6. ЛFalsificationС, p. 176, footnote 1.

7. Cf. also his remarks on false consciousnessС in ЛHistoryС, pp. 94, 1084.

8. For an older example, cf. the Born—Einstein Letters, New York, 1971, p. 150.

9. ibid., pp. 105A.

10. Cf. text to footnotes 9-12 of Chapter 4.


Finally, the kind of comparison that underlies most methodologies is possible
only in some rather simple cases. It breaks down when we try to compare
non-scientific views with science or when we consider the most advanced,
most general and therefore most mythological parts of science itself.
Ihave much sympathy with the view, formulated clearly and elegantly
by Whorf (and anticipated by Bacon), that languages and the reaction
patterns they involve are not merely instruments for describing events
(facts, states of affair), but that they are also shapers of events (facts,
states of aff: airs),! that their ЛgrammarС contains a cosmology, a
comprehensive view of the world, of society, of the situation of man?
which influences thought, behaviour, perception.? According to
Whorf the cosmology of a language is expressed partly by the overt
use of words, but it also rests on classifications Лwhich ha[ve] no overt
mark . . . but which operate [] through an invisible “central exchangeФ
of linkage bonds in such a way as to determine other words which
mark the class.С* Thus Л{t]he gender nouns, such as boy, girl, father,
wife, uncle, woman, lady, including thousands of given names like
George, Fred, Mary, Charlie, Isabel, Isadore, Jane, John, Alice,
Aloysius, Esther, Lester, bear no distinguishing mark of gender like
the Latin - us or -a within each motor process, but nevertheless each
of these thousands of words has an invariable linkage bond
connecting it with absolute precision either to the word “heФ or to the
word “sheФ which, however, does not come into the overt behaviour

1. According to Whorf Лthe background linguistic system (in other words, the
grammar) of each language is not merely a reproducing system for voicing ideas, but
rather is itself a shaper of ideas, the programme and guide for the individualСs mental
activity, for his analysis of impressions, for his synthesis of his mental stock in tradeС.
Language, Thought and Reality, Cambridge, Mass., 1956, p. 121. See also Appendix 2.

2. Asan example cf. WhorfСs analysis of Hopi Metaphysics in ibid,, pp. 57ff.

3. ЛUsers of markedly different grammars are pointed by their grammars towards
different types of observations ...С, ibid., p. 221.

4. ibid. p.69. :


SIXTEEN 165
picture until and unless special situations of discourse require
i195
it

Covert classifications (which, because of their subterranean nature,
are Лsensed rather than comprehended — awareness of [them] has an
intuitive quality — which Лare quite apt to be more rational than
overt onesСФ and which may be very ЛsubtleС and not connected Лwith
any grand dichotomyС®) create Лpatterned resistances to widely
divergent points of viewС. If these resistances oppose not just the
truth of the resisted alternatives but the presumption that an
alternative has been presented, then we have an instance of
incommensurability.

I also believe that scientific theories, such as AristotleСs theory of
motion, the theory of relativity, the quantum theory, classical and
modern cosmology are sufficiently general, sufficiently ЛdeepС and
have developed in sufficiently complex ways to be considered along
the same lines as natural languages. The discussions that prepare the
transition to a new age in physics, or in astronomy, are hardly ever
restricted to the overt features of the orthodox point of view. They
often reveal hidden ideas, replace them by ideas of a different kind,
and change overt as well as covert classifications. GalileoСs analysis of
the tower argument led to a clearer formulation of the Aristotelian
theory of space and italso revealed the difference between impetus (an

5. ibid, p. 68.

6. ibid., p. 70. Even Л{a] phoneme may assume definite semantic duties as part of
its rapport. In English the phoneme 9 [ЛthornС] (the voiced sound of tA) occurs initially
only in the cryptotype [covertclassification not connected with any grand dichotomy —
p. 70] of demonstrative particles (the, this, there, than, etc.). Hence, there is a psychic
pressure against accepting the voiced sound of th in new or imaginary words: thig, thay,
thob, thuzzle, etc., not having demonstrative meaning. Encountering such a new word
(eg. thob) on a page, we will “instinctivelyФ give it the voiceless sound @ of th in “thinkФ.
But it is not “instinctФ. Just our old friend linguistic rapport againС (p. 76, my italics).

7. ibid, p. 80. The passage continues: Л...some rather formal and not very
meaningful linguistic group, marked by some overt feature, may happen to coincide
very roughly with some concatenation of phenomena in such a way as to suggest a
rationalization of this parallelism. In the course of phonetic change, the distinguishing
mark, ending, or what not is lost, and the class passes from a formal to a semantic one.
Its reactance is now what distinguishes it as a class, and its idea is what unifies it. As
time and use go on, it becomes increasingly organized around a rationale, it attracts
Semantically suitable words and loses former members that now are semantically
Mappropriate. Logic is now what holds it together.С Cf. also MillСs account of his
educational development as described in text to footnote 14 of Chapter 11.

8. Whorf, op. cit. p. 70. Such subdle classifications are called cryptotypes by
Whorf, A cryptotype is Лa submerged, subtle, and elusive meaning, corresponding to
No actual word, yet shown by linguistic analysis to be functionally important in the
grammarС.

9. ibid., p. 247.


166 AGAINST METHOD

absolute magnitude that inheres in the object) and momentum (which
depends on the chosen reference system). EinsteinСs analysis of simultaneity unearthed some features of the Newtonian cosmology which,
though unknown, had influenced all arguments about space and time,
while Niels Bohr found in addition that the physical world could not be
regarded as being entirely separated from the observer and thus gave
content to the idea of independence that was part of classical physics.
Attending to cases such as these we realize that scientific arguments
may indeed be subjected to Лpatterned resistancesС and we expect that
incommensurability will also occur among theories.

(As incommensurability depends on covert classifications and
involves major conceptual changes it is hardly ever possible to give an
explicit definition of it. Nor will the customary ЛreconstructionsС
succeed in bringing it to the fore. The phenomenon must be shown,
the reader must be led up to it by being confronted with a great variety
of instances, and he must then judge for himself. This will be the
method adopted in the present chapter.)

Interesting cases of incommensurability occur already in the
domain of perception. Given appropriate stimuli, but different systems
of classification (different Лmental setsС), our perceptual apparatus
may produce perceptual objects which cannot be easily compared.!°
A direct judgement is impossible. We may compare the two objects in
our memory, but not while attending to the same picture. The first
drawing below goes one step further. It gives rise to perceptual
objects which do not just negate other perceptual objects — thus
retaining the basic categories — but prevent the formation of any
object whatsoever (note that the cylinder in the middle fades into
nothingness as we approach the inside of the two-pronged stimulus).
Not even memory can now give us a full view of the alternatives.

10. ЛA master of introspection, Kenneth Clark, has recently described to us most
vividly how even he was defeated when he attempted to “stallФ an illusion. Looking ata
great Velésquez, he wanted to observe what went on when the brush strokes and dabs of
pigment on the canvas transformed themselves into a vision of transfigured reality as he
stepped back. But try as he might, stepping backward and forward, he could never hold
bothvisions at the same time ...С, E. Gombrich, Art and Illusion, Princeton, 1956, p. 6.


SIXTEEN 167

Every picture with only a modicum of perspective exhibits this
phenomenon: we may decide to pay attention to the piece of paper on
which the lines are drawn — but then there is no three-dimensional
pattern; on the other hand we may decide to investigate the
properties of this pattern, but then the surface of the paper
disappears, or is integrated into what can only be called an illusion.
There is no way of ЛcatchingС the transition from the one to the
other." In all these cases the perceived image depends on Лmental
setsС that can be changed at will, without the help of drugs, hypnosis,
reconditioning. But mental sets may become frozen by illness, as a
result of oneСs upbringing in a certain culture, or because of
physiological determinants not in our control. (Not every change of
language is accompanied by perceptual changes.) Our attitude
towards other races, or towards people of a different cultural
background, often depends on ЛfrozenС sets of the second kind:
having learned to ЛreadС faces in a standard way we make standard
judgements and are led astray.

An interesting example of physiologically determined sets leading
to incommensurability is provided by the development of human
perception. As has been suggested by Piaget and his school,!? a
childСs perception proceeds through various stages before it reaches
its relatively stable adult form. In one stage, objects seem to behave
very much like after-images and are treated as such. The child

11. Cf. RL. Gregory, The Intelligent Eye, London, 1970, Chapter 2. Cf. also the
distinction between eikon and phantasma in Plato, Sophistes, 235b8ff. ЛThis “appearingФ or “seemingФ without really “beingФ... all these expressions have always been
and still are deeply involved in perplexity.С Plato talks aboutthe distortions in statues of
Colossal size which were introduced to make them appear with the proper proportions.
i cannot make use of an illusion and watch it,С says Gombrich in such cases, op. cit.,

12. J. Piaget, The Construction of Reality in the Child, New York, 1954, pp. Sff.


168 AGAINST METHOD

follows the object with his eyes until it disappears; he does not make
the slightest attempt to recover it, even if this should require but a
minimal physical (or intellectual) effort, an effort, moreover, that is
already within the childСs reach. There is not even a tendency to
search —and this is quite appropriate, ЛconceptuallyС speaking. For it
would indeed be nonsensical to Лlook forС an after-image. Its
ЛconceptС does not provide for such an operation.

The arrival of the concept, and of the perceptual image, of material
objects, changes the situation quite dramatically. There occurs a
drastic reorientation of behavioural patterns and, so one may
conjecture, of thought. After-images, or things somewhat like them,
still exist; but they are now difficult to find and must be discovered
by special methods (the earlier visual world therefore literally disappears)."° Such methods proceed from a new conceptual scheme
(after-images occur in humans, they are not parts of the physical
world) and cannot lead back to the exact phenomena of the previous
stage. (These phenomena should therefore be called by a different
name, such as Лpseudo-after-imagesС — a very interesting perceptual
analogue to the transition from, say, Newtonian mechanics to special
relativity: relativity, too, does not give us Newtonian facts, but
relativistic analogues of Newtonian facts.) Neither after-images nor
pseudo-after-images have a special position in the new world. For
example, they are not treated as evidence on which the new notion of a
material object is supposed to rest. Nor can they be used to explain
this notion: after-images arise together with it, they depend on it, and
are absent from the minds of those who do not yet recognize material
objects; and pseudo-after-images disappear as soon as such
recognition takes place. The perceptual field never contains afterimages together with pseudo-after-images. It is to be admitted that
every stage possesses a kind of observational ЛbasisС to which special
attention is paid and from which a multitude of suggestions are
received. However, this basis (a) changes from stage to stage, and (6) it
is part of the conceptual apparatus of a given stage, not its one and
only source of interpretation as some empiricists would like to make
us believe.

Considering developments such as these, we may suspect that the
family of concepts centring upon Лmaterial objectС and the family of
concepts centring upon Лpseudo-after-imageС are incommensurable

13. This seems to be a general feature of the acquisition of new perceptual worlds:
ЛThe older representations for the most part have to be suppressed rather than
reformed,С writes Stratton in his epoch-making essay ЛVision without Inversion of the
Retinal ImageС. The Psychological Review IV, 1897, p. 471.


SIXTEEN 169
in precisely the sense that is at issue here; these families cannot be
used simultaneously and neither logical nor perceptual connections
can be established between them.

Now is it reasonable to expect that conceptual and perceptual
changes of this kind occur in childhood only? Should we welcome the
fact, if it is a fact, that an adult is stuck with a stable perceptual world
and an accompanying stable conceptual system, which he can modify
in many ways but whose general outlines have forever become
immobilized? Or is it not more realistic to assume that fundamental
changes, entailing incommensurability, are still possible and that
they should be encouraged lest we remain forever excluded from
what might be a higher stage of knowledge and consciousness?
Besides, the question of the mobility of the adult stage is at any rate an
empirical question that must be attacked by research, and cannot be
settled by methodological fiat.'* The attempt to break through the
boundaries of a given conceptual system is an essential part of
such research (it also should be an essential part of any interesting
life).

Such an attempt involves much more than a prolonged Лcritical
discussionС'> as some relics of the enlightenment would have us
believe. One must be able to produce and to grasp new perceptual and
conceptual relations, including relations which are not immediately
apparent (covert relations — see above) and that cannot be achieved by
a critical discussion alone (cf. also above, Chapters 1 and 2). The
orthodox accounts neglect the covert relations that contribute to their
meaning, disregard perceptual changes and treat the rest in a rigidly
standardized way so that any debate of unusual ideas is at once
stopped by a series of routine responses. But now this whole array of
responses is in doubt. Every concept that occurs in it is suspect,
especially ЛfundamentalС concepts such as ЛobservationС, ЛtestС, and, of
course, the concept ЛtheoryС itself. And as regards the word ЛtruthС, we
can at this stage only say that it certainly has people in a tizzy, but
has not achieved much else. The best way to proceed in such
circumstances is to use examples which are outside the range of the
routine responses. It is for this reason that I have decided to examine
means of representation different from languages or theories and to
develop my terminology in connection with them. More especially, I
shall examine styles in painting and drawing. It will emerge that there
—___

14. As Lakatos attempts to do: ЛFalsificationС, p. 179, footnote 1: ЛIncommensurable theories are neither inconsistent with each other, nor comparable for content.
But we can makethem, by a dictionary, inconsistent and their content comparable.С

15. Popper in Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, p. 56.


170 AGAINST METHOD

are no ЛneutralС objects which can be represented in any style, and
which measure its closeness to ЛrealityС. The application to languages
is obvious.

The Лarchaic styleС as defined by Emanuel Loewy in his work on
ancient Greek art'® has the following characteristics.

(1) The structure and the movement of the figures and of their
parts are limited to a few typical schemes; (2) the individual forms are
stylized, they tend to have a certain regularity and are Лexecuted with
... precise abstractionС,'Ф (3) the representation of a form depends
on the contour which may retain the value of an independent line or
form the boundaries of a silhouette. ЛThe silhouettes could be givena
number of postures: they could stand, march, row, drive, fight, die,
lament. ... But always their essential structure must be clearС;'® (4)
colour appears in one shade only, and gradations of light and shadow
are missing; (5) as a rule the figures show their parts (and the larger
episodes their elements) in their most complete aspect — even if this
means awkwardness in composition, and Лa certain disregard of
spatial relationshipsС. The parts are given their known value even
when this conflicts with their seen relationship to the whole;!? thus
(6) with a few well-determined exceptions the figures which form a
composition are arranged in such a way that overlaps are avoided and
objects situated behind each other are presented as being side by
side; (7) the environment of an action (mountains, clouds, trees, etc.)
is either completely disregarded or it is omitted to a large extent. The
action forms self-contained units of typical scenes (battles, funerals,
etc.).

These stylistic elements which are found, in various modifications,
in the drawings of children, in the ЛfrontalС art of the Egyptians, in
early Greek art, as well as among so-called Primitives, are explained

16. Die Naturwiedergabe in der alteren Griechischen Kunst, Rome, 1900, Chapter 1.
Loewy uses ЛarchaicС as a generic term covering phenomena in Egyptian, Greek and
Primitive Art, in the drawings of children and of untutored observers. In Greece his
remarks apply to the geometric style (1000 to 700 BC) down to the archaic period (700 to
500 Bc) which treats the human figure in greater detail and involves it in lively
episodes. Cf. also F. Matz, Geschichte der Griechischen Kunst, Vol. 1, 1950, as well 28
Beazly and Ashmole, Greek Sculpture and Painting, Cambridge, 1966, Chapters II and
Ml.

17. Webster, From Mycenae to Homer, New York, 1964, p. 292. Webster regards
this use of Лsimple and clear patternsС in Greek geometric art as Лthe forerunner of later
developments in art (ultimately the invention of perspective), mathematics, and
philosophyС.

18. Webster, op. cit., p. 205.

19. ibid, p. 207.

20. Beazly and Ashmole, op.cit., p. 3.


SIXTEEN 171
by Loewy on the basis of psychological mechanisms: ЛSide by side
with the images which reality presents to the physical eye there exists
an entirely different world of images which live or, better, come to life
in our mind only and which, although suggested by reality, are totally
transformed. Every primitive act of drawing ... tries to reproduce
these images and them alone with the instinctive regularity of a
psychical function.СФ' The archaic style changes as a result of
Лnumerous planned observations of nature which modify the pure
mental imagesС,ФФ initiate the development towards realism and thus
start the history of art. Natural, physiological reasons are given for the
archaic style and for its change.

Now it is not clear why it should be more ЛnaturalС to copy memory
images than images of perception which are better defined and more

23 i.
permanent.Ф We also find that realism often precedes more
schematic forms of presentation. This is true of the Old Stone
Age,Ф* of Egyptian Art,Ф> of Attic Geometric Art.° In all these
cases the Лarchaic styleС is the result of a conscious effort (which may
of course be aided, or hindered, by unconscious tendencies and
physiological laws) rather than a natural reaction to internal deposits

21. Loewy, op. cit, p. 4.

22. ibid, p. 6.

23. The facts of perspective are noticed but they do not enter the pictorial
presentation; this is seen from literary descriptions. Cf. H. Schafer, Von Acgyptischer
Kunst, Wiesbaden, 1963, pp. 88ff, where the problem is further discussed.

24. Cf. Paolo Graziosi, Palaeolithic Art, New York, 1960, and André LerocGourhan, Treasures of Prehistoric Art, New York, 1967, both with excellent illustrations.
ЛThese results were not known to Loewy: CartailhacСs ЛMea culpa dСun sceptiqueС, for
example, appeared only in 1902.

25. Cf. the change in the presentation of animals in the course of the transition
from predynastic times to the First Dynasty. The Berlin lion (Berlin, Staatliches
Museum, Nr. 22440) is wild, threatening, quite different in expression and execution
from the majestic animal of the Second and Third Dynasties. The latter seems
to be more a representation of the concept lion than of any individual lion. Cf.
also the difference between the falcon on the victory tablet of King Narmer
(backside) and on the burial stone of King Wadji (Djet) of the First Dynasty.
ЛEverywhere one advanced to pure clarity, the forms were strengthened and made
simple,С Schéfer, op. cit, pp. 12ff, especially p. 15 where further details are
Siven.

26. ЛAttic geometric art should not be called primitive, although it has not the kind
of photographic realism which literary scholars seem to demand in painting. It is a
highly sophisticated art with its own conventions which serve its own purposes. As with
the shapes and the ornamentation, a revolution separates it from late Mycenaean
Painting. In this revolution figures were reduced to their minimum silhouettes, and
out of these minimum silhouettes the new art was built up. Webster, op. cit.,
p. 205.


172 AGAINST METHOD

of external stimuli.Ф Instead of looking for the psychological aauses
of a ЛstyleС we should therefore rather try to discover its elements,
analyse their function, compare them with other phenomena of the
same culture (literary style, sentence construction, grammar,
ideology) and thus arrive at an outline of the underlying world-view
including an account of the way in which this world-view influences
perception, thought, argument, and of the limits it imposes on the
roaming about of the imagination. We shall see that such an analysis
of outlines provides a better understanding of the process of
conceptual change than either a naturalistic account which
recognizes only one ЛrealityС and orders artworks by their closeness to
it, or trite slogans such as Лa critical discussion and a comparison of
... various frameworks is always possibleС.Ф8 Of course, some kind of
comparison is a/ways possible (for example, one physical theory may
sound more melodious when read aloud to the accompaniment of a
guitar than another physical theory). But lay down specific rules for the
process of comparison, such as the rules of logic as applied to the
relation of content classes, or some simple rules of perspective and
you will find exceptions, undue restrictions, and you will be forced to
talk your way out of trouble at every turn. It is much more interesting
and instructive to examine what kinds of things can be said
(represented) and what kinds of things cannot be said (represented) if
the comparison has to take place within a certain specified and historically
well-entrenched framework. For such an examination we must go
beyond generalities and study frameworks in detail. I start with an
account of some examples of the archaic style.

The human figure shows the following characteristics: Лthe men
are very tall and thin, the trunk of a triangle tapering to the waist, the
head of a knob with a mere excrescence for a face: towards the end of
the style the head is lit up — the head knob is drawn in outline, and a
dot signifies the eyeС? All, or almost all, parts are shown in profile
and they are strung together like the limbs of a puppet or a rag doll.
They are not ЛintegratedС to form an organic whole. This ЛadditiveС
feature of the archaic style becomes very clear from the treatment of
the eye. The eye does not participate in the actions of the body, it
does not guide the body or establish contact with the surrounding
situation, it does not ЛlookС. It is added on to the profile head like part

27. This thesis is further supported by the observation that so-called Primitives
often tum their back to the objects they want to draw; Schafer, op. cit, p. 102, after

onze.

28. Popper, in Criticism, etc, p. 56.

29. Beazly and Ashmole, op. cit, p. 3.


SIXTEEN 173
of a notation as if the artist wanted to say: Лand beside all these other
things such as legs, arms, feet, a man has also eyes, they are in the
head, one on each sideС. Similarly, special states of the body (alive,
dead, sick) are not indicated by a special arrangement of its parts, but
by putting the same standard body into various standard positions.
Thus the body of the dead man in a funeral carriage is articulated in
exactly the same way as that of a standing man, but it is rotated
through 90 degrees and inserted in the space between the bottom of
the shroud and the top of the bier.>° Being shaped like the body of a
live man it is in addition put into the death position. Another instance
is the picture of a kid half swallowed by a lion.*! The lion looks
ferocious, the kid looks peaceful, and the act of swallowing is simply
tacked on to the presentation of what a lion is and what a kid is. (We
have what is called a paratactic aggregate: the elements of such an
aggregate are all given equal importance, the only relation between
them is sequential, there is no hierarchy, no part is presented as being
subordinate to and determined by others.) The picture reads:
ferocious lion, peaceful kid, swallowing of kid by lion.

The need to show every essential part of a situation often leads toa
separation of parts which are actually in contact. The picture
becomes a list. Thus a charioteer standing in a carriage is shown as
standing above the floor (which is presented in its fullest view) and
unencumbered by the rails so that his feet, the floor, the rails can all
be clearly seen. No trouble arises if we regard the painting as a visual
catalogue of the parts of an event rather than as an illusory rendering
of the event itself (no trouble arises when we say: his feet touched the
floor which is rectangular, and he was surrounded by a railing... .)°*
Butsuch an interpretation must be /earned, it cannot be simply read
off the picture.

The amount of learning needed may be considerable. Some
Egyptian drawings and paintings can be decoded only with the help
of either the represented object itself or with the help of threedimensional copies of it (statuary in the case of humans, animals,
etc.). Using such information we learn that the chair in Figure A
represents the object of Figure C and not the object of Figure B and
that it must be read: Лchair with backrest and four legs, legs connected

30. Webster, op. cit., p. 204: ЛThe painter feels the need to say that he has two
arms, two legs, and a manly chest.С

31. R. Hampl, Die Gleichnisse Homers und die Bildkunst seiner Zeit, Titbingen, 1952.

32. ЛAll geometric pictures of chariots show at least one of these distortions.Ф
Webster, op. cit., p. 204. Late Mycenaean pottery, on the other hand, has the legs of
the occupants concealed by the side.


174 AGAINST METHOD
by supportС where it is understood that the front legs are connected
with the back legs and not with each other.*> The interpretation of
groups is complicated and some cases are not yet understood.**
| FIGURE A |
FIGURE B FIGURE C

(Being able to ЛreadС a certain style also includes knowledge of
what features are irrelevant. Not every feature of an archaic list has
representational value just as not every feature of a written sentence
plays a role in articulating its content. This was overlooked by the
Greeks who started inquiring into the reasons for the Лdignified
posturesС of Egyptian statues (already Plato commented on this).
Such a question Лmight have struck an Egyptian artist as it would
strike us if someone inquired about the age or the mood of the king
on the chessboardС.*)

So far a brief account of some peculiarities of the ЛarchaicС style.

A style can be described and analysed in various ways. The
descriptions given so far paid attention to formal features: the archaic
style provides visible lists whose parts are arranged in roughly the
same way in which they occur in ЛnatureС except when such an
arrangementis liable to hide important elements. All parts are on the

33. Schafer, op. cit., p. 123.

34. ibid., pp. 223ff.

35. Gombrich, op. cit., p. 134, with literature.


SIXTEEN 175
same level, we are supposed to ЛreadС the lists rather than ЛseeС them
as illusory accounts of the situation.** The lists are not organized in
any way except sequentially, that is, the shape of an element does not
depend on the presence of other elements (adding a lion and the act
of swallowing does not make the kid look unhappy; adding the
process of dying does not make a man look weak). Archaic pictures
are paratactic aggregates, not hypotactic systems. The elements of the
aggregate may be physical parts such as heads, arms, wheels, they
may be states of affair such as the fact that a body is dead, they may be
actions, such as the action of swallowing.

Instead of describing the formal features of a style, we may
describe the ontological features of a world that consists of the elements
represented in the style, arranged in the appropriate way, and we may
also describe the impression such a world makes upon the viewer.
This is the procedure of the art critic who loves to dwell on the
peculiar behaviour of the characters which the artist puts on his
canvas and on the Лinternal lifeС the behaviour seems to indicate.
Thus G.M.S. Hanfmann*Ф writes on the archaic figure: ЛNo matter
how animated and agile archaic heroes may be, they do not appear to
move by their own will. Their gestures are explanatory formulae
imposed upon the actors from without in order to explain what sort of
action is going on. And the crucial obstacle to the convincing
portrayal of inner life was the curiously detached character of the
archaic eye. It shows that a person is alive, but itcannot adjust itself to
the demands of a specific situation. Even when the archaic artist
succeeds in denoting a humorous or tragic mood, these factors of
externalized gesture and detached glance recall the exaggerated
animation of a puppet play.С

An ontological description frequently adds just verbiage to the

36. ЛWe come closer to the factual content of frontal [geradvorstelliger] drawings of
objects, if we start by reading off their partial contents in the form of narrative
declarative sentences. The frontal mode of representation gives us a “visual conceptФ
[Sehbegriff| of the thing (the situation) represented.С Schafer, op. cit, p. 118. Cf. also
Webster, op. cit., p. 202, about the ЛnarrativeС and ЛexplanatoryС character of
Mycenaean and geometric art. But cf. H.A. Groenewegen-Frankfort, Arrest and
Movement, London, 1951, pp. 33f: the scenes from daily life on the walls of Egyptian
tombs Лshould be “readФ: harvesting entails ploughing, sowing, and reaping; care of
cattle entails fording of streams and milking ... the sequence of scenes is purely
conceptual, not narrative, nor is the writing which occurs with the scenes dramatic in
character. The signs, remarks, names, songs and explanations, which illuminate the
action ... do not link events or explain their development; they are typical sayings
belonging to typical situations.С
isp Narration in Greek ArtС, American Journal of Archacology, Vol. 61, January

+p. 74.


176 AGAINST METHOD

formal analysis, it is nothing but an exercise in ЛsensitivityС and
cuteness. However, we must not disregard the possibility that a
particular style grves a precise account of the world as it is percetved by the
artist and his contemporaries and that every formal feature corresponds
to (hidden or explicit) assumptions inherent in the underlying
cosmology. (In the case of the ЛarchaicС style we must not disregard
the possibility that humans then actually /é/t themselves to be what
we today would call puppets guided by outside forces and that they
saw and treated others accordingly.) Such a realistic interpretation of
styles would be in line with WhorfСs thesis that in addition to being
instruments for describing events (which may have other features, not
covered by any description) languages are also shapers of events (so
that there is a linguistic limit to what can be said in a given language,
and this limit coincides with the limits of the thing itself) but it would
go beyond it by including non-linguistic means of representation.*®
The realistic interpretation is very plausible. But it must not be taken
for granted.*?

It must not be taken for granted, for there are technical failures,
special purposes (caricature) which may change a style without
changing the cosmology. We must also remember that humans have
roughly the same neurophysiological equipment, so that perception
cannot be bent in any direction one chooses.Ф And in some cases we
can indeed show that deviations from a Лfaithful rendering of natureС
occur in the presence of a detailed knowledge of the object and side
by side with more ЛrealisticС presentations: the workshop of the
sculptor Thutmosis in Tel al-Amarna (the ancient Achet-Aton)
contains masks directly taken from live models with all the details of
the formation of the head (indentations) and of the face intact, as well
as heads developed from such masks. Some of these heads preserve
the details, others eliminate them and replace them by simple forms.
An extreme example is the completely smooth head of an Egyptian
man. It proves that Лat least some artists remained consciously
independent of natureС.*' During the reign of Amenophis IV (BC
1364-1347) the mode of representation was changed twice; the first
change, towards a more realistic style, occurred merely four years

38. Cf. footnote | and text of the present chapter.

39. For a sketch of the problems that arise in the case of physical theories cf. my
ЛReply to CriticismС, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 2, 1965, sections 5~
8, and especially the list of problems on p. 234. Hanson, Popper and others take it for
granted that realism is correct.

40. It may be different with drug-induced states, especially when they are made
part of a systematic course of education.

41. Schafer, op. cit, p. 63.


SIXTEEN 177
after his ascension to the throne which shows that the technical ability
for realism existed, was ready for use, but was intentionally left
undeveloped. An inference from style (or language) to cosmology and modes
of perception therefore needs special argument: it cannot be made as a matter
of course. (A similar remark applies to any inference from popular
theories in science, such as the theory of relativity, or the idea of the
motion of the earth, to cosmology and modes of perception.)

Theargument (which can never be conclusive) consists in pointing
to characteristic features in distant fields. If the idiosyncrasies of a
particular style of painting are found also in statuary, in the grammar
of contemporary languages (and here especially in covert classifications which cannot be easily twisted around), if it can be shown that
these languages are spoken by artists and by the common folk alike, if
there are philosophical principles formulated in the languages which
declare the idiosyncrasies to be features of the world and not just
artifacts and which try to account for their origin, if man and nature
have these features not only in paintings, but also in poetry, in
popular sayings, in common law, if the idea that the features are parts
of normal perception is not contradicted by anything we know from
physiology, or from the psychology of perception, if later thinkers
attack the idiosyncrasies as ЛerrorsС resulting from an ignorance of the
Лtrue wayС, then we may assume that we are not just dealing with
technical failures and particular purposes, but with a coherent way of
iife, and we may expect that people involved in this way of life see the
world in the same way in which we now see their pictures. It seems
that all these conditions are satisfied in archaic Greece: the formal
structure and the ideology of the Greek epic as reconstructed both
from the text and from later references to it repeat all the peculiarities
of the later geometric and the early archaic style.**

To start with, about nine-tenths of the Homeric epics consist of
formulae which are prefabricated phrases extending in length from a
single word or two to several complete lines and which are repeated at
appropriate places.*? One-fifth of the poems consist of lines wholly
repeated from one place to another; in 28,000 Homeric lines there
are about 25,000 repeated phrases. Repetitions occur already in
Mycenaean court poetry and they can be traced to the poetry of

42. Webster, op. cit, pp. 294ff.

43. In the 20th century the role of formulae was described and tested by Milman
Parry, L'Epithéte traditionelle chez Homére, Paris, 1928; Harvard Studies in Classical
Philology, Vols. 41, 1930, 43, 1932. For a brief account cf. D.. Page, History and the
Homeric Iliad, Berkeley, 1966, Chapter VI, as well as G.S. Kirk, Homer and the Epic,
Cambridge, 1965, Part 1.


178 AGAINST METHOD

eastern courts: ЛTitles of gods, kings, and men must be given
correctly, and in a courtly world the principle of correct expression
may be extended further. Royal correspondence is highly formal, and
this formality is extended beyond the messenger scenes of poetry to
the formulae used for introducing speeches. Similarly, operations are
reported in the terms of the operation order, whether the operation
order itself is given or not, and this technique is extended to other
descriptions, which have no such operation orders behind them.
These compulsions all derive ultimately from the court of the king,
and it is reasonable to suppose that the court in turn enjoyed such
formality in poetry.** The conditions of (Sumerian, Babylonian,
Hurrian, Hethitic, Phoenician, Mycenaean) courts also explain the
occurrence of standardized elements of content (typical scenes;
the king and the nobles in war and peace; furniture; description
of beautiful things) which, moving from city to city, and even
across national boundaries are repeated, and adapted to local
circumstances.

The slowly arising combination of constant and variable elements
that is the result of numerous adaptations of this kind was utilized by
the illiterate poets of the ЛDark AgeС of Greece who developed a
language and forms of expression that best serve the requirements of
oral composition. The requirement of memory demanded that there be
ready-made descriptions of events that can be used by a poet who
composes in his mind, and without the aid of writing. The
requirement of metre demanded that the basic descriptive phrases be
fit for use in the various parts of the line the poet is about to complete:
ЛUnlike the poet who writes out his lines ... [the oral poet] cannot
think without hurry about his next word, nor change what he has
made nor, before going on, read over what he has just written. ... He
must have for his use word groups all made to fit his verse.Ф**
Economy demanded that given a situation and a certain metrical
constraint (beginning, middle or end of a line) there be only one way
of continuing the narration — and this demand is satisfied to a
surprising extent: ЛAll the chief characters of the //iad and the
Odyssey, if their names can be fitted into the last half of the verse along
with an epithet, have a noun-epithet formula in the nominative,
beginning with a simple consonant, which fills the verse between
the trochaic caesure of the third foot and the verse end: for instance, moAtthac dtog "Odvocevc. In a list of thirty-seven
characters who have formulae of this type, which includes all those

44, Webster, op. cit, pp. 75f.

45. M. Parry, Harvard Stud Cl. Phil., 41, 1930, p. 77.


SIXTEEN 179
having any importance in the poems, there are only three names
which have a second formula which could replace the first.С*° ЛIf you
take in the five grammatic cases the singular of all the noun-epithet
formulae used for Achilles, you will find that you have forty-five
different formulae of which none has, in the same case, the same
metrical value.С*Ф Being provided for in this manner, the Homeric
poet Лhas no interest in originality of expression, or in variety. He uses
or adapts inherited formulae.С*Ф He does not have a Лchoice, dofes]
not even think in terms of choice; for a given partof the line, whatever
declension case was needed, and whatever the subject matter might
be, the formular vocabulary supplied at once a combination of words
ready-madeС.Ф

Using the formulae the Homeric poet gives an account of typical
scenes in which objects are occasionally described by Лadding the parts
on in a string of words in appositionС.°° Ideas we would today regard
as being logically subordinate to others are stated in separate,
grammatically co-ordinate propositions. Example (Iliad, 9.556ff):
Meleagros Лlay by his wedded wife, fair Cleopatra, daughter of fairankled Marpessa, daughter of Euenos, and of Ides, who was the
strongest of men on earth at that time — and he against lord Phoebus
Apollo took up his bow for the sake of the fair-ankled maid: her then
in their halls did her father and lady mother call by the name of
Alkyon because...С and so on, for ten more lines and two or three
more major themes before a major stop. This paratactic feature of
Homeric poetry which parallels the absence of elaborate systems of
subordinate clauses in early Greek*! also makes it clear why

46. ibid, pp. 86f.

47. ibid., p. 89.

48. Page, op.cit., p. 230.

49. ibid, p. 242.

50. Webster, op. cit., pp. 99f; my italics.

51. Cf. Raphael Kiihner, Ausfithrliche Grammatik der Griechischen Sprache, 2. Teil,
reprinted Darmstadt, 1966. In the 20th century such a paratactic or ЛsimultanisticС,
way of presentation was used by the early expressionists, for example by Jacob von
Hoddis in his poem Weltende:

Dem Biirger fliegt vom spitzen Kopf der Hut,
In allen Liiften hallt es wie Geschrei.
Dachdecker stiirzen ab und gehn entzwei,

Und an den Kiisten — liest man — steigt die Flut.
Der Sturm ist da, die wilden Meere hupfen

An Land, um dicke Damme zu zerdriicken.
Die meisten Menschen haben einen Schnupfen.
Die Eisenbahnen fallen von den Brucken.


180 AGAINST METHOD

Aphrodite is called Лsweetly laughingС when in fact she complains
tearfully (liad, 5.375), or why Achilles is called Лswift footedС when he
is sitting talking to Priam (liad, 24.559). Just as in late geometric
pottery (in the ЛarchaicС style of Loewy) a dead body is a live body
brought into the position of death (cf. above, text to foomote 30) or an
eaten kid a live and peaceful kid brought into the appropriate relation
to the mouth of a ferocious lion, in the very same way Aphrodite
complaining is simply Aphrodite — and that is the laughing goddess —
inserted into the situation of complaining in which she participates
only externally, without changing her nature.

The additive treatment of events becomes very clear in the case of
(human) motion. In /liad, 22.298, Achilles drags Hector along in the
dust Лand dust arose around him that was dragged, and his dark hair
flowed loose on either side, and in the dust /ay his once fair headС —
that is, the process of dragging contains the state of lying as an
independent part which together with other such parts constitutes
the motion.*Ф Speaking more abstractly, we might say that for the
poet Лtime is composed of momentsС.*? Many of the similes assume
that the parts of a complex entity have a life of their own and can be
separated with ease. Geometrical man is a visible list of parts and
positions, Homeric man is put together from limbs, surfaces,
connections which are isolated by comparing them with inanimate
objects of precisely defined shape: the trunk of Hippolochos rolls
through the battle field like a /og after Agamemnon has cut off his
Von Hoddis claims Homer as a precursor, explaining that simultaneity was used by
Homer not in order to make an event more transparent but in order to create a feeling
of immeasurable spaciousness. When Homer describes a battle and compares the
noise of the weapons with the beat of a woodcutter, he merely wants to show that while
there is battle there is also the quiemess of woods, interrupted only by the work of the
woodcutter. Catastrophe cannot be thought without simultaneously thinking of some
utterly unimportant event. The Great is mixed up with the Small, the Important with
the Trivial. (For the report cf. J.R. Becher in Expressionismus, ed. P. Raabe, Olten and
Freiburg, 1965, pp. 50M; this short article also contains a description of the
tremendous impression von HoddisС eight-liner made when it first came out in 1911.)
One cannot infer that the same impression was created in the listener of the Homeric
singers who did not possess a complex and romanticizing medium that had
deteriorated into tearful sentimentality as a background for comparison.

52. Cf. Gebhard Kurz, Darstellungsformen menschlicher Bewegung in der Ilias,
Heidelberg, 1966, p. 50.

53. This is the theory ascribed to Zeno by Aristotle, Physics, 239b, 31. The theory
comes forth most clearly in the argument of the arrow: ЛThe arrow at flight is at rest.
For, if everything is at rest when it occupies a space equal to itself, and what is in flighe
at any given moment always occupies a space equal to itself, it cannot moveС (after
Physics, 239b). We cannot say that the theory was held by Zeno himself, but we may
conjecture that it played a role in ZenoСs time.


SIXTEEN 181
arms and his head (Iliad, 11.146 -— 6Apoc, round stone of
cylindrical shape), the body of Hector spins like a top (Iliad, 14.412),
the head of Gorgythion drops to one side Лlike a garden popey being
heavy with fruit and the showers of springС (Jiiad, 8.302);°* and so on.
Also, the formulae of the epic, especially the noun-epithet combinations, are frequently used not according to content but according to
metrical convenience: ЛZeus changes from counsellor to stormmountain god to paternal god not in connection with what he is doing,
but at the dictates of metre. He is not nephelegerata Zeus when
he is gathering clouds, but when he is filling the metrical unit,
Uu-vuy —~С,» just as the geometrical artist may distort spatial
relations — introduce contact where none exists and break it where it
occurs — in order to tell the visual story in his own particular way.
Thus the poet repeats the formal features used by the geometric and
the early archaic artists. Neither seems to be aware of an Лunderlying
substanceС that keeps the objects together and shapes their parts so
that they reflect the Лhigher unityС to which they belong.

Nor is such a Лhigher unityС found in the concepts of the language.
For example, there is no expression that could be used to describe the
human body as a single entity.>° Soma is the corpse, demas is
accusative of specification, it means Лin structureС, or Лas regards
shapeС, reference to limbs occurs where we today speak of the body
(yvia, limbs as moved by the joints; éAea, limbs in their
bodily strength; AéAvvto yvia, his whole body trembled;
ideoc & pedéwv éogev, his body was filled with strength).
All we get is a puppet put together from more or less articulated
parts.

The puppet does not have a soul in our sense. The ЛbodyС is an
aggregate of limbs, trunk, motion, the ЛsoulС is an aggregate of
ЛmentalС events which are not necessarily private and which may
belong to a different individual altogether. ЛNever does Homer in his
description of ideas or emotions, go beyond a purely spatial, or
quantitative definition; never does he attempt to sound their special,

54. Kurz, loc. cit.

55. R. Lattimore, The [liad of Homer, Chicago, 1951, pp. 39f.

56. For the following cf. B. Snell, The Discovery of the Mind, Harper Torchbooks,
1960, Chapter 1. SnellСs views have been criticized but seem to survive the criticism.
Cf. the report in F. Krafft, Vergleichende Untersuchungen zu Homer und Hesiod,
Hypomnemata, Heft 6, Gattingen, 1963, pp. 25f. In his Gesammelte Schriften,

Лéttingen, 1966, p. 18, Snell also argues that Лin Homer we never find a personal
decision, a conscious choice made by an acting human being. A human being who is
faced with various possibilities never thinks: “now it depends on me, it depends on
what I decide to doФ.С


182 AGAINST METHOD

non-physical nature.С>Ф Actions are initiated not by an Лautonomous
I, but by further actions, events, occurrences, including divine
interference. And this is precisely how mental events are ex-

- 58 .

perienced.ФС Dreams, unusual psychological feats such as sudden
remembering, sudden acts of recognition, sudden increase of vital
energy, during battle, during a strenuous escape, sudden fits of anger
are not only explained by reference to gods and demons, they are also
felt as such. AgamemnonСs dream Лlistened to his [ZeusС] words and
descendedС (Iliad, 2.16) — the dream descends, not a figure in it — Лand
it stood then beside his [AgamemnonСs] head in the likeness of
NestorС (Iliad, 2.20). One does not have a dream (a dream is not a
ЛsubjectiveС event), one sees it (it is an ЛobjectiveС event) and one also
sees how it approaches and moves away.С Sudden anger, fits of
strength are described and felt to be divine acts: ЛZeus builds up
and Zeus diminishes strength in man the way he pleases, since his
power is beyond all othersС (/itad, 20.241) is not just an objective
description (that may be extended to include the behaviour of
animals) it also expresses the feeling that the change has entered from
the outside, that one has been Лfilled .. . with strong courageС (Iliad,
13.60). Today such events are either forgotten or regarded as purely
accidental.° ЛBut for Homer, or for early thought in general, there is
no such thing as accident.°* Every event is accounted for. This
makes the events clearer, strengthens their objective features,
moulds them into the shape of known gods and demons and thus
turns them into powerful evidence for the divine apparatus that is

57. Snell, Gesammelte Schriften, p. 18.

58. Cf. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational, Boston, 1957, Chapter 1.

59. With some effort this experience can be repeated even today. Step 1: lie down,
close your eyes, and attend to your hypnagogic hallucinations. Step 2: permit the
hallucinations to proceed on their own and according to their own tendencies. They
will then change from events in front of the eyes into events that gradually surround the
viewer but without yet making him an active participant of an action in a threedimensional dream-space. Step 3: switch over from viewing the hallucinatory event to
being part of a complex of real events which act on the viewer and can be acted upon by
him. Step 3 can be reversed either by the act of an almost non-existent will or by an
outside noise. The three-dimensional scenery becomes two-dimensional, runs
together into an area in front of the eyes, and moves away. It would be interesting tosee
how such formal elements change from culture to culture.

60. Today we say that somebody is ЛovercomeС by emotions and he may feel his
anger as an alien thing that invades him against his will. The daemonic ontology of the
Greeks contains objective terminology for describing this feature of our emotions and
thereby stabilizes it.

61. Psychoanalysis and related ideologies now again contribute to making such
events part of a wider context and thereby lend them substantiality.

62. Dodds, op. cit, p. 6.


SIXTEEN 183
used for explaining them: ЛThe gods are present. To recognize this as
a given fact for the Greeks is the first condition for comprehending
their religion and their culture. Our knowledge of their presence
rests upon an (inner or outer) experience of either the Gods
themselves or of an action of the Gods.С®}

Tosum up: the archaic world is much less compact than the world
that surrounds us, and it is also experienced as being less compact.
Archaic man lacks ЛphysicalС unity, his ЛbodyС consists of a multitude
of parts, limbs, surfaces, connections; and he lacks ЛmentalС unity, his
ЛmindС is composed of a variety of events, some of them not even
ЛmentalС in our sense, which either inhabit the body-puppet as
additional constituents or are brought into it from the outside. Events
are not shaped by the individual, they are complex arrangements of
parts into which the body-puppet is inserted at the appropriate

64-7 4 .
place.*Ф This is the world-view that emerges from an analysis of the
formal features of ЛarchaicС art and Homeric poetry, taken in
conjunction with an analysis of the concepts which the Homeric poet
used for describing what he perceives. Its main features are

63. Wilamowitz—Moellendorf, Der Glaube der Hellenen, 1, 1955, p. 17. Our
conceptions of the world subdivide an otherwise uniform material and create
differences in perceived brightness where objective brightness has no gradient. The
same process is responsible for the ordering of the rather chaotic impressions of our
inner life, leading to an (inner) perception of divine interference, and it may even
introduce daemons, gods, sprites into the domain of outer perceptions. At any rate —
there is a sufficient number of daemonic experiences not to reject this conjecture out
of hand.

64. This means that success is not the result of an effort on the part of the
individual but the fortunate fitting together of circumstances. This shows itself even in
words like xodttew, which seem to designate activities. In Homer such words
emphasize not so much the effect of the agent as the fact that the result comes about in
the right way, that the process that brings it about does not encounter too many
disturbances; it fits into the other processes that surround it (in the Attic dialect
eixdrtw still means ЛI am doing wellС. Similarly tévyewv emphasizes
Not so much a personal achievement as the fact that things go well, that they fit into
their surroundings. The same is true of the acquisition of knowledge. ЛOdysseus has
seen a lot and experienced much, moreover, he is the xoAuprjzavoc who can
always help himself in new ways, and, finally, he is the man who listens to his goddess
Athena. The part of knowledge that is based on seeing is not really the result of his own
activity and research, it rather happened to him while he was driven around by external
circumstances. He is very diff erent from Solon who, as Herodotus tells us, was the first
to travel for theoretical reasons, because he was interested in research. In Odysseus
the knowledge of many things is strangely separated from his activity in the field of the
Аx(oacGat: this activity is restricted to finding means for reaching a certain
aim, in order to save his life and the life of his associates.С B. Snell, Die alten Griechen
und Wir, Gottingen, 1962, p. 48. In this place also.a more detailed analysis of pertinent
terms. Cf. also footnote 56 on the apparent non-existence of personal decisions.


184 AGAINST METHOD
experienced by the individuals using the concepts. These individuals live
indeed in the same kind of world that is constructed by their artists.

Further evidence for the conjecture can be obtained from an
examination of Лmeta-attitudesС such as general religious attitudes
and ЛtheoriesС of (attitudes to) knowledge.

For the lack of compactness just described reappears in the field of
ideology. There is a tolerance in religious matters which later
generations found morally and theoretically unacceptable and which
even today is regarded as a manifestation of frivolous and simple
minds.© Archaic man is a religious eclectic, he does not object to
foreign gods and myths, he adds them to the existing furniture of the
world without any attempt at synthesis, or a removal of contradictions. There are no priests, there is no dogma, there are no
categorical statements about the gods, humans, the world. (This
tolerance can still be found with the Ionian philosophers of nature
who develop their ideas side by side with myth without trying to
eliminate the latter.) There is no religious ЛmoralityС in our sense, nor
are the gods abstract embodiments of eternal principles.°Ф This they
became later, during the archaic age and as a result they Лlost [their]
humanity. Hence Olympianism in its moralized form tended to
become a religion of fear, a tendency which is reflected in the
religious vocabulary. There is no word for “god-fearingФ in the
Mliad.®® This is how life was dehumanized by what some people are
pleased to call Лmoral progressС or Лscientific progressС.

Similar remarks apply to the Лtheory of knowledgeС that is implicit
in this early world view. The Muses in /liad, 2.284 ff, have knowledge
because they are close to things — they do not have torely on rumours—
and because they know all the many things that are of interest to the
writer, one after the other. ЛQuantity, not intensity is HomerСs
standard of judgementС and of knowledge,®? as becomes clear
from such words as xoktqowyv and xoAvpntic, Лmuch
ponderingС and Лmuch thinkingС, as well as from later criticisms such
as ЛLearning of many things [moAvpaO(n] does not teach
intelligenceС. ° An interest in, and a wish to understand, many
amazing things (such as earthquakes, eclipses of the sun and the
moon, the paradoxical rising and falling of the Nile), each of them

65. Example: F. Schachermayer, Die fniihe Klassik der Griechen, Stutygart, 1966.

66. Cf. Wilamowitz—Moellendorf, op. cit.

67. M.P. Nilsson, A History of Greek Religion, Oxford, 1949, p. 152.

68. Dodds, op.cit., p. 35.

69. Snell, The Discovery of the Mind, p. 18.

70. Heraclitus, after Diogenes Laertius, IX, 1.


SIXTEEN 185
explained in its own particular way and without the use of universal
principles, persists in the coastal descriptions of the 8th and 7th (and
later) centuries (which simply enumerate the tribes, tribal habits, and
coastal formations that are successively met during the journey), and
even a thinker such as Thales is satisfied with making many
interesting observations and providing many explanations without

. . H 71 .
trying to tie them together in a system.С (The first thinker to
construct a ЛsystemС was Anaximander, who followed Hesiod.)
Knowledge so conceived is not obtained by trying to grasp an essence
behind the reports of the senses, but by (1) putting the observer in the
right position relative to the object (process, aggregate), by inserting
him into the appropriate place in the complex pattern that constitutes
the world, and (2) by adding up the elements which are noted under
these circumstances. It is the result of a complex survey carried out
from suitable vantage points. One may doubt a vague report, or a
fifth-hand account, but it is not possible to doubt what one can clearly
see with oneСs own eyes. The object depicted or described is the
proper arrangements of the elements which may include foreshortenings and other perspectoid phenomena.Ф The fact that an oar
looks broken in water lacks here the sceptical force it assumes in
another ideology.Ф Just as Achilles sitting does not make us doubt
that he is swift-footed — as a matter of fact, we would start doubting
his swiftness if it turned out that he is in principle incapable of sitting
— in the very same way the bent oar does not make us doubt that it is
perfectly straight in air — as a matter of fact, we would start doubting
its straightness if it did not look bent in water.С" The bent oar is not

71. The idea that Thales used a principle expressing an underlying unity of
natural phenomena and that he identified this principle with water is first found in
Aristotle, Metaphysics, 983b6~12 and 26ff. A closer look at this and other passages and
consultation of Herodotus suggests that he still belongs to the group of those thinkers
who deal with numerous extraordinary phenomena, without tying them together in a
system. Cf. the vivid presentation in F. Krafft, Geschichte der Naturwissenschafien, |,
Freiburg, 1971, Chapter 3.

72. Perspectoid phenomena are sometimes treated as if they were special
properties of the objects depicted. For example, a container of the Old Kingdom
(Ancient Egypt) has an indentation on top, indicating perspective, but the indentation
is presented as a feature of the object itself, Schéfer, op. cit., p. 266. Some Greek
artists try to find situations where perspective does not need to be considered. Thus
the peculiarity of the so-called red-figure style that arises in about 530 BC Лdoes not so
tnuch consist in the fact that foreshortenings are drawn, but in the new and highly
varied ways to circumvent themС, E. Pfuhl, Malerei und Zeichnung der Griechen, Vol. |,
Munich, 1923, p. 378.

73. Cf. the discussion in Chapter I of A.J. AyerСs Foundations of Empirical
Knowledge. The example was familiar in antiquity.

74. This is also the way in which J.L. Austin takes care of the case. Cf. Sense and


186 AGAINST METHOD

an aspect that denies what another aspect says about the nature of the
oar, it is a particular part (situation) of the real oar that is not only
compatible with its straightness, but that demands it: the objects of
knowledge are as additive as the visible lists of the archaic artist and
the situations described by the archaic poet.

Nor is there any uniform conception of knowledge.С A great
variety of words is used for expressing what we today regard as
different forms of knowledge, or as different ways of acquiring
knowledge. cogtaСС means expertise in a certain profession
(carpenter, singer, general, physician, charioteer, wrestler) including
the arts (where it praises the artist not as an outstanding creator but as
a master of his craft); eiSevai, literally Лhaving seenС, refers
to knowledge gained from inspection; ovvinut, especially in
the Jliad, though often translated as ЛlisteningС or ЛunderstandingС, is
stronger, it contains the idea of following and obeying, one absorbs
something and acts in accordance with it (hearing may play an
important role). And so on. Many of these expressions entail a
receptive attitude on the part of the knower, he, as itwere, acts out the
behaviour of the things around him, he follows them, 7 he acts as
befits an entity that is inserted at the place he occupies.

To repeat and to conclude: the modes of representation used
during the early archaic period in Greece are not just reflections of
incompetence or of special artistic interests, they give a faithful
account of what are felt, seen, thought to be fundamental features of
the world of archaic man. This world is an open world. Its elements
are not formed or held together by an Лunderlying substanceС, they
are not appearances from which this substance may be inferred with
difficulty. They occasionally coalesce to form assemblages. The
relation of a single element to the assemblage to which it belongs is
like the relation of a part to an aggregate of parts and not like the
relation ofa part to an overpowering whole. The particular aggregate
called ЛmanС is visited, and occasionally inhabited by Лmental eventsС.
Sensibilia, New York, 1962. It is clear that problems such as the Лproblem of the
existence of theoretical entitiesС cannot arise under these circumstances either. All
these problems are created by the new approach that superseded the additive ideology
of archaic and pre-archaic times.

75. B. Snell, Die Ausdriicke fiir den Begriff des Wissens in der vorplatonischen
Philosophie, Berlin, 1924. A short account is given in Snell, Die alten Griechen und wir,
pp. 41ff. Cf. also von Fritz, Philosophie und sprachlicher Ausdruck bei Demoknit, Plato, und
Aristoteles, Leipzig—Paris-London, 1938.

76. Only occurrence in Homer, fliad, 15, 42, conceming the cogta of a
carpenter (an Лexpert carpenterС translates Lattimore).

77. Cf. Snell, Ausdnicke, p. 50.


SIXTEEN 187
Such events may reside in him, they may also enter from the outside.
Like every other object man is an exchange station of influences
rather than a unique source of action, an ЛIС (DescartesС ЛcogitoС has
no point of attack in this world, and his argument cannot even start).
There is a great similarity between this view and MachСs cosmology
except that the elements of the archaic world are recognizable
physical and mental shapes and events while MachСs elements are
more abstract, they are as yet unknown aims of research, not its object.
Insum, the representational units of the archaic world view admit of a
realistic interpretation, they express a coherent ontology, and
WhorfСs observations apply.
At this point I interrupt my argument in order to make some
comments which connect the preceding observations with the
problems of scientific method.

1. Itmay be objected that foreshortenings and other indications of
perspective are such obvious features of our perceptual world that
they cannot have been absent from the perceptual world of the
Ancients. The archaic manner of presentation is therefore incomplete, and its realistic interpretation incorrect.

Reply: Foreshortenings are not an obvious feature of our perceptual world unless special attention is drawn to them (in an age of
photography and film this is rather frequently the case). Unless we
are professional photographers, film-makers, painters we perceive
things, not aspects. Moving swiftly among complex objects we notice
much less change than a perception of aspects would permit.
Aspects, foreshortenings, if they enter our consciousness at all, are
usually suppressed just as after-images are suppressed when the
appropriate stage of perceptual development is completedФ® and
they are noticed in special situations only.Ф? In ancient Greece such
special situations arose in the theatre, for the first-row viewers of the
impressive productions of Aeschylus and Agatharchos, and there is
indeed a school thatascribes to the theatre a decisive influence on the
development of perspective.®° Besides, why should the perceptual
world of the ancient Greeks coincide with ours? It needs more
argument than reference to a non-existent form of perception to
consolidate the objection.

78. Cf. footnote 12ffand text of the present chapter.

79. Cf. footnote 13.

80. Cf. Part Il of Hedwig Kenner, Das Theater und der Realismus in der Griechischen
Kunst, Vienna, 1954, especially pp. 121f.


188 AGAINST METHOD

2. The procedure used for establishing the peculiarities of the
archaic cosmology has much in common with the method of an
anthropologist who examines the world-view of an association of
tribes. The differences are due to the scarcity of the evidence and to
the particular circumstances of its origin (written sources; works of
art; no personal contact). Let us take a closer look at this procedure!

An anthropologist trying to discover the cosmology of his chosen
tribe and the way in which it is mirrored in language, in the arts, in
daily life, first learns the language and the basic social habits; he
inquires how they are related to other activities, including such prima
facie unimportant activities as milking cows and cooking meals;*' he
tries to identify key ideas.** His attention to minutiae is not the
result of a misguided urge for completeness but of the realization that
what looks insignificant to one way of thinking (and perceiving) may
play a most important role in another. (The differences between the
paper-and-pencil operations of a Lorentzian and those of an
Einsteinian are often minute, if discernible at all; yet they reflect a
major clash of ideologies.)

Having found the key ideas the anthropologist tries to understand
them. This he does in the same way in which he originally gained an
understanding of his own language, including the language of the
special profession that provides him with an income. He internalizes
the ideas so that their connections are firmly engraved in his memory
and his reactions, and can be produced at will. ЛThe native society has
to be in the anthropologist himself and not merely in his notebooks if
he is to understand itФ®? This process must be kept free from external
interference. For example, the researcher must not try to get a better
hold on the ideas of the tribe by likening them to ideas he already
knows, or finds more comprehensible or more precise. On no
account must he attempt a Лlogical reconstructionС. Such a procedure
would tie him to the known, or to what is preferred by certain groups,
and would forever prevent him from grasping the unknown worldview he is examining.

Having completed his study, the anthropologist carries within
himself both the native society and his own background, and he may
now start comparing the two. The comparison decides whether the
native way of thinking can be reproduced in European terms
(provided there is a unique set of ЛEuropean termsС), or whether it has
a ЛlogicС of its own, not found in any Western language. In the course

81. Evans-Pritchard, Socal Anthropology, New York, 1965, p. 80.

82. ibid., p. 80.

83. ibid, p. 82.


SIXTEEN 189
of the comparison the anthropologist may rephrase certain native
ideas in English. This does not mean that English as spoken
independently of the comparison already contains native ideas. It means
that languages can be bent in many directions and that understanding
does not depend on any particular set of rules.

3. The examination of key ideas passes through various stages,
none of which leads to a complete clarification. Here the researcher
must exercise firm control over his urge for instant clarity and logical
perfection. He must never try to make a concept clearer than is
suggested by the material (except as a temporary aid for further
research). It is this material and not his logical intuition that
determines the content of the concepts. To take an example. The
Nuer, a Nilotic tribe which has been examined by Evans-Pritchard,
have some interesting spatio-temporal concepts.** The researcher
who is not too familiar with Nuer thought will find the concepts
Лunclear and insufficiently preciseС. To improve matters he might try
explicating them, using modern logical notions. That might create
clear concepts, but they would no longer be Nuer concepts. If, on the
other hand, he wants to get concepts which are both clear and Nuer,
then he must keep his key notions vague and incomplete until the right
information comes along, i.e. until field study turns up the missing
elements which, taken by themselves, are just as unclear as the
elements he has already found.

Each item of information is a building block of understanding,
which means that it has to be clarified by the discovery of further
blocks from the language and ideology of the tribe rather than by
premature definitions. Statements such as Л...the Nuer ... cannot
speak of time as though it was something actual, which passes, can be
waited for, can be saved, and so forth. I do not think that they ever
experience the same feeling of fighting against time, or of having to
co-ordinate activities with an abstract passage of time, because their
points of reference are mainly the activities themselves, which are
generally of a leisurely character . . .Ф*° are either building blocks — in
this case their own content is incomplete and not fully understood —
or they are preliminary attempts to anticipate the arrangement of the
totality of all blocks. They must then be tested, and elucidated by the
discovery of further blocks rather than by logical clarifications (a
child learns the meaning of a word not by logical clarification but by
—___

84. Evans- Pritchard, The Nuer, Oxford, 1940, Part III; cf. also the brief account in
Social Anthropology, pp. 102ff.

85. The Nuer, p. 103.


190 AGAINST METHOD

realizing how it goes together with things and other words). Lack of
clarity of any particular anthropological statement reflects the
scarcity of the material rather than the vagueness of the logical
intuitions of the anthropologist, or of his tribe.

4. Exactly the same remarks apply to any attempt to explore
important modern notions such as the notion of incommensurability,
Within the sciences incommensurability is closely connected with
meaning. A study of incommensurability in the sciences will
therefore produce statements that contain meaning-terms — but
these terms will be only incompletely understood, just as the term
ЛtimeС is incompletely understood in the quotation of the preceding
paragraph. Thus the remark that such statements should be made
only after production of a clear theory of meaning®® is as sensible as
the remark that statements about Nuer time, which are the material
that /eads to an understanding of Nuer time, should be written down
only after such an understanding has been achieved.

5. Logicians are liable to object. They point out that an examination of meanings and of the relation between terms is the task of logic,
not of anthropology. Now by ЛlogicС one may mean at least two
different things. ЛLogicС may mean the study of, or results of the study
of, the structures inherent in a certain type of discourse. And it may
mean a particular logical system, or set of systems.

A study of the first kind belongs to anthropology. For in order to
see, for example, whether AB v AB = A is part of the Лlogic of
quantum theoryС we shall have to study quantum theory. And as
quantum theory is not a divine emanation but a human product, we
shall have to study it in the form in which human products usually are
available, that is, we shall have to study historical records — textbooks,
original papers, records of meetings and private conversations,
letters, and the like. (In the case of quantum theory our position is
improved by the fact that the tribe of quantum theoreticians has not
yet died out. Thus we can supplement historical study with
anthropological field work such as the work of Kuhn and his
collaborators.°Ф)

86. Achinstein, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 4, Minneapolis,
1970, p. 224, says that ЛFeyerabend owe(s] us a theory of meaningС and Hempel is
prepared to accept incommensurability only a/ter the notion of meaning involved in it
has been made clear, op. cit, p. 156.

87. Report in T.S. Kuhn, J.L. Heilbron, P. Forman and L. Allen, Sources for the
History of Quantum Physics, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, 1967. The
material assembled under the programme described in this report can be consulted at
various universities, the University of California in Berkeley among them.


SIXTEEN 191

It is to be admitted that these records do not, by themselves,
produce a unique solution to our problems. But who has ever
assumed that they do? Historical records do not produce a unique
solution for historical problems either, and yet nobody suggests that
they be neglected. There is no doubt that the records are necessary for
a logical study in the sense examined now. The question is how they
should be used.

We want to discover the structure of the field of discourse, of
which the records give an incomplete account. We want to learn
about it without changing it in any way. In our example we are not
interested in whether a perfected quantum mechanics of the future
employs AB v AB = A or whether an invention of our own, whether a
little bit of ЛreconstructionС which changes the theory so that it
conforms to some preconceived principles of modern logic and
readily provides the answer employs that principle. We want to know
whether quantum theory as actually practised by physicists employs the
principle. For it is the work of the physicists and not the work of the
reconstructionists we want to examine. And this work may well be full
of contradictions and lacunae. Its ЛlogicС (in the sense in which | am
now using the term) may well be ЛillogicalС when judged from the
point of view of a particular system of formal logic.

Putting the question in this way we realize that it may not admit of
any answer. There may not exist a single theory, one Лquantum
theoryС, that is used in the same way by all physicists. The difference
between Bohr, Dirac, Feynman and von Neumann suggests that this
is more than a distant possibility. To test the possibility, i.e. to either
eliminate it or to give it shape, we must examine concrete cases. Such
an examination of concrete cases may then lead to the result that
quantum theoreticians differ from each other as widely as do
Catholics and the various types of Protestants: they may use the same
texts (though even that is doubtful — just compare Dirac with von
Neumann), but they sure are doing different things with them.

The need for anthropological case studies in a field that initially
seemed to be dominated by a single myth, always the same, always
used in the same manner, indicates that our common knowledge of
science may be severely defective. It may be entirely mistaken (some
mistakes have been hinted at in the preceding chapters). In these
circumstances, the only safe way is to confess ignorance, to abandon
reconstructions, and to start studying science from scratch. We must
approach science like an anthropologist approaches the mental
contortions of the medicine-men of a newly discovered association of
tribes. And we must be prepared for the discovery that these
Contortions are wildly illogical (when judged from the point of view of


192 AGAINST METHOD
a particular system of formal logic) and have to be wildly illogical in
order to function as they do.

6. Only a few philosophers of science interpret ЛlogicС in this
sense, however. Only few philosophers are prepared to concede that
the basic structures that underlie some newly discovered idiom might
differ radically from the basic structures of the more familiar systems
of formal logic and absolutely nobody is ready to admit that this might
be true of science as well. Most of the time the ЛlogicС (in the sense
discussed so far) of a particular language, or of a theory, is
immediately identified with the features of a particular logical system
without considering the need for an inquiry concerning the adequacy
of such an identification. Professor Giedymin, for example, means
by ЛlogicС a favourite system of his which is fairly comprehensive, but
by no means all-embracing. (For example, it does not contain, nor
could it be used to formulate, HegelСs ideas. And there have been
mathematicians who have doubted that it can be used for expressing
informal mathematics.) A logical study of science as Giedymin and
his fellow logicians understand it is a study of sets of formulae of this
system, of their structure, the properties of their ultimate constituents (intension, extension, etc.), of their consequences and of
possible models. If this study does not repeat the features an
anthropologist has found in, say, science then this either shows that
science has some faults, or that the anthropologist does not know any
logic. It does not make the slightest difference to the logician in this
second sense that his formulae do not look like scientific statements,
that they are not used like scientific statements and that science could
not possibly grow in the simple ways his brain is capable of
understanding (and therefore regards as the only permissible ways).
He either does not notice the discrepancy or he regards it as being
due to imperfections that cannot enter a satisfactory account. Not
once does it occur to him that the ЛimperfectionsС might have a
Positive function, and that scientific progress might be impossible
once they are removed. For him science is axiomatics plus model
theory plus correspondence rules plus observation language.

Such a procedure assumes (without noticing that there is an
assumption involved) that an anthropological study which familiarizes us with the overt and the hidden classifications of science has
been completed, and that it has decided in favour of the axiomatic
(etc., etc.) approach. No such study has ever been carried out. And
the bits and pieces of field work available today, mainly as the result of

88. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, August 1970, pp. 257ff and
February 1971, pp. 39ff.


SIXTEEN 193
the work of Hanson, Kuhn, Lakatos and the numerous historians
who remained untouched by positivistic prejudices, show that the
logicianСs approach removes not just some inessential embroideries
ofscience, but those very features which make scientific progress and
thereby science possible.

7. The discussions of meaning I have alluded to are another
illustration of the deficiencies of the logicianСs approach. For
Giedymin, this term and its derivatives, such as the term ЛincommensurabilityС, are Лunclear and insufficiently preciseС. I agree. Giedymin
wants to make the terms clearer, he wants to understand them better.
Again agreement. He tries to obtain the clarity he feels is lacking by
explication in terms of a particular kind of formal logic and of the
double language model, restricting the discussion to ЛintensionС and
ЛextensionС as explained in the chosen logic. It is here that the
disagreement starts. For the question is not how ЛmeaningС and
ЛincommensurabilityС occur within a particular logical system. The
question is what role they play in (actual, i.e. non-reconstructed)
science. Clarification must come from a more detailed study of this
role, and lacunae must be filled with the results of such study. And as
the filling takes time the key terms will be Лunclear and insufficiently
preciseС for years and perhaps decades. (See also items 3 and 4
above.)

8. Logicians and philosophers of science do not see the situation
in this way. Being both unwilling and unable to carry out an informal
discussion, they demand that the main terms of the discussion be
ЛclarifiedС. And to ЛclarifyС the terms of a discussion does not mean to
study the additional and as yet unknown properties of the domain in
question which one needs to make them fully understood, it means to
fill them with existing notions from the entirely different domain of
logic and common sense, preferably observational ideas, until they
sound common themselves, and to take care that the process of filling
obeys the accepted laws of logic. The discussion is permitted to
proceed only afier its initial steps have been modified in this manner.
So the course of an investigation is deflected into the narrow
channels of things already understood and the possibility of fundamental conceptual discovery (or of fundamental conceptual
change) is considerably reduced. Fundamental conceptual change,
On the other hand, presupposes new world-views and new languages
capable of expressing them. Now, building a new world-view, and a
Corresponding new language, is a process that takes time, in science
as well as in meta-science. The terms of the new language become
clear only when the process is fairly advanced, so that each single
Word is the centre of numerous lines connecting it with other words,


194 AGAINST METHOD
sentences, bits of reasoning, gestures which sound absurd at first but
which become perfectly reasonable once the connections are made.
Arguments, theories, terms, points of view and debates can therefore
be clarified in at least two different ways: (a) in the manner already
described, which leads back to the familiar ideas and treats the new as
a special case of things already understood, and (b) by incorporation
into a language of the future, which means that one must learn to argue
with unexplained terms and to use sentences for which no clear rules of usage
are as yet available. Just as a child who starts using words without yet
understanding them, who adds more and more uncomprehended
linguistic fragments to his playful activity, discovers the sense-giving
principle only after he has been active in this way for a long time — the
activity being a necessary presupposition of the final blossoming forth
of sense — in the very same way the inventor of a new world-view (and
the philosopher of science who tries to understand his procedure)
must be able to talk nonsense until the amount of nonsense created
by him and his friends is big enough to give sense to all its parts.
There is again no better account of this process than the description
which John Stuart Mill has left us of the vicissitudes of his education.
Referring to the explanations which his father gave him on logical
matters, he wrote: ЛThe explanations did not make the matter at all
clear to me at the time; but they were not therefore useless; they
remained as a nucleus for my observations and reflections to
crystallise upon; the import of his general remarks being interpreted
to me, by the particular instances which came under my notice
afterwards.Ф®? Building a new language (for understanding the world,
or knowledge) is a process of exactly the same kind except that the
initial ЛnucleiС are not given, but must be invented. We see here how
essential it is to learn talking in riddles, and how disastrous an effect
the drive for instant clarity must have on our understanding. (In
addition, such a drive betrays a rather narrow and barbaric mentality:
ЛTo use words and phrases in an easy going way without scrutinizing
them too curiously is not, in general, a mark of ill breeding; on the
contrary, there is something low bred in being too precise... .СФ°)

All these remarks are rather trivial and can be illustrated

89. There is much more randomness in this process than a rationalist would ever
permit, or suspect, or even notice. Cf.von Kleist, ЛUber die allmiahliche Verfertigung
der Gedanken beim RedenС, in Meisterwerke Deutscher Literaturkritik, ed. Hans Meyer,
Stuttgart, 1962, pp. 741-7. Hegel had an inkling of the situation. Cf. K. Loewith and J.
Riedel (eds), Hegel, Studienausgabe I. Frankfurt, 1968, p. 54. For Mill cf. Chapter 11,
foomote 13.

90. Plato, Theaitetes, 184c. Cf. also I. Diiring, Aristoteles, Heidelberg, 1966, p. 379,
criticizing Aristotle's demand for instant precision.


SIXTEEN 195
by obvious examples. Classical logic arrived on the scene only
when there was sufficient argumentative material (in mathematics,
rhetoric, politics) to serve as a starting point and as a testing ground.
Arithmetic developed without any clear understanding of the
concept of number; such understanding arose only when there
existed a sufficient amount of arithmetical ЛfactsС to give it substance.
In the same way a proper theory of meaning (and of incommensurability) can arise only after a sufficient number of ЛfactsС has been
assembled to make such a theory more than an exercise in conceptpushing. This is the reason for the examples in the present section.

9. There is still another dogma to be considered before returning
to the main narration. It is the dogma that all subjects, however
assembled, quite automatically obey the laws of logic, or ought to
obey the laws of logic. If this is so, then anthropological field work
would seem to be superfluous. ЛWhat is true in logic is true in
psychology ... in scientific method, and in the history of science,С
writes Popper.Ф!

This dogmatic assertion is neither clear nor is it (in one of its main
interpretations) true. To start with, assume that the expressions
ЛpsychologyС, Лhistory of scienceС, ЛanthropologyС refer to certain
domains of facts and regularities (of nature, of perception, of the
human mind, of society). Then the assertion is not clear as there is not
a single subject - LOGIC — that underlies all these domains. There
is Hegel, there is Brouwer, there are the many logical systems
considered by modern constructivists. They offer not just different
interpretations of one and the same bulk of logical ЛfactsС, but
different ЛfactsС altogether. And the assertion is not rue as there exist
legitimate scientific statements which violate simple logical rules. For
example, there are statements which play an important role in
established scientific disciplines and which are observationally
adequate only if they are self-contradictory: fixate a moving pattern
that has just come to a standstill, and you will see it move in the
opposite direction, but without changing its position. The only
phenomenologically adequate description is Лit moves, in space, but it
does not change placeС — and this description is self-contradictory.Ф

91. Objective Knowledge, Oxford, 1972, p. 6. Anticipated eg. by Comte, Course, 52°
Lecon and, of course, Aristotle.

92. Ithas been objected (Ayer, G.E.L. Owen) thatwe are dealing with appearances,
Notwith actual events, and that the correct description is Лit appears tomove. . ..С Butthe
difficulty remains. For if we introduce the ЛappearС, we must put itat the beginning of the
Sentence, which will read Лit appears that it moves and does not change placeС. And as.
appearances belong to the domain of phenomenological psychology we have made our
Point, viz. that this domain contains self-inconsistent elements.


196 AGAINST METHOD

There are examples from geometry:Ф thus the enclosed figure
(which need not appear in the same way to every person) is seen as an
isosceles triangle whose base is not halved by the perpendicular. And
there are examples with a = b & b = c & a > c as the only
phenomenologically adequate description.** Moreover, there is not
asingle science, or other form of life that is useful, progressive as well
as in agreement with logical demands. Every science contains
theories which are inconsistent both with facts and with other
theories and which reveal contradictions when analysed in detail.
Only a dogmatic belief in the principles of an allegedly uniform
discipline ЛLogicС will make us disregard this situation. And the
objection that logical principles and principles of, say, arithmetic
differ from empirical principles by not being accessible to the method
of conjecture and refutations (or, for that matter, any other
empysica? method) has been defused by more recent research in this

eld.

Secondly, let us assume that the expressions ЛpsychologyС, ЛanthropologyС, Лhistory of scienceС, ЛphysicsС do not refer to facts and laws,
but to certain methods of assembling facts including certain ways
of connecting observation with theory and hypothesis. That is, let
us consider the activity ЛscienceС and its various subdivisions. Then
we may lay down ideal demands of knowledge and knowledgeacquisition, and we may try to construct a (social) machinery that
obeys these demands. Almost all epistemologists and philosophers of
science proceed in this way. Occasionally they succeed in finding a

93. E. Rubin, ЛVisual Figures Apparently Incompatible with GeometryС, Ads
Psychologica, VII, 1950, pp. 365if. Cf. also the drawings on pages 166-7.
we ES Tranckjacr-Rasmussen, Perspectoid DistancesС, Ada Psychologica, XI,

95. Mainly bythe work of Imre Lakatos, ЛProofs and RefutationС, British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 1962/63.


SIXTEEN 197
machinery that might work in certain ideal conditions, but they never
inquire, or even find it worth inquiring, whether the conditions are
satisfied in this real world of ours. Such an inquiry, on the other
hand, will have to explore the way in which scientists actually deal
with their surroundings, it will have to examine the actual shape of
their product, viz. ЛknowledgeС, and the way in which this product
changes as a result of decisions and actions in complex social and
material conditions. In a word, such an inquiry will have to be
anthropological.

There is no way of predicting what an anthropological inquiry will
bring to light. In the preceding chapters, which are rough sketches of
an anthropological study of particular episodes, it has emerged that
science is full of lacunae and contradictions, that ignorance,
pigheadedness, reliance on prejudice, lying, far from impeding the
forward march of knowledge may actually aid it and that the
traditional virtues of precision, consistency, ЛhonestyС, respect for
facts, maximum knowledge under given circumstances, if practised
with determination, may bring it to a standstill. It has also emerged
that logical principles not only play a much smaller role in the
(argumentative and non-argumentative) moves that advance science,
but that the attempt to enforce them would seriously impede science.
(One cannot say that von Neumann has advanced the quantum
theory. But he certainly made the discussion of its basis more longwinded and cumbersome.Ф°)

Now a scientist engaged in a certain piece of research has not yet
completed all the steps that lead to definite results. His future is still
open. Will he follow the barren and illiterate logician who preaches to
him about the virtues of clarity, consistency, experimental support (or
experimental falsification), tightness of argument, ЛhonestyС, and so
on, or will he imitate his predecessors in his own field who advanced
by breaking most of the rules logicians want to lay on him? Will he rely
on abstract injunctions or on the results of a study of concrete
episodes? I think the answer is clear and with it the relevance of
anthropological field work not just for the anthropologists but also for
the members of the societies he examines. I now continue my
narration and proceed to describing the transition from the paratactic
universe of the archaic Greeks to the substance-appearance universe
of their followers.

—____

__ 96. Besides, the imprecisions which he removes from the formalism now reappear
in the relation between theory and fact. Here the correspondence principle still reigns
supreme. Cf. footnote 25 of Chapter 5.


198 AGAINST METHOD
The archaic cosmology (which from now on I shall call cosmology A)
contains things, events, their parts; it does not contain appearances.
Complete knowledge of an object is complete enumeration of its parts
and peculiarities. Humans cannot have complete knowledge. There
are too many things, too many events, too many situations (Iliad,
2.488), and they can be close to only a few of them (Jiad, 2.485). But
although humans cannot have complete knowledge, they can have a
sizeable amount of it. The wider their experience, the greater the
number of adventures, of things seen, heard, read, the greater their
knowledge.Ф®

The new cosmology (cosmology B) that arises in the 7th to Sth
centuries BC distinguishes between much-knowing, noAvpaG(n,
and true knowledge,Ф and it warns against crusting Лcustom
born of manifold experienceС, 0c modtmeigov.'™ Such a
distinction and such a waming make sense only in a world whose
structure differs from the structure of A. In one version which playeda
large role in the development of Western civilization and which
underlies such problems as the problem of the existence of theoretical
entities and the problem of alienation the new events form what one
might call a True World, while the events of everyday life are now
appearances that are but its dim and misleading reflection.'°' The
True World is simple and coherent, and it can be described in a
uniform way. So can every act by which its elements are
comprehended: a few abstractnotions replace the numerous concepts
that were used in cosmology A for describing how humans might be
ЛinsertedС into their surroundings and for expressing the equally
numerous types of information thus gained. Fromnow on there isonly
one important type of information, and that is: knowledge.

97. Snell, Ausdniicke, p. 28 (referring to Homer), speaks of a Лknowledge that
proceeds from appearances and draws their multitude together in a unit which is then
posited as their true essenceС. This may apply to the Presocratics, it does not apply to
Homer. In the case of Homer Лthe world is comprehended as the sum of things, visible
in space, and not as reason acting intensivelyС (ibid., p. 67, discussing Empedokles; cf.
also the lines following the quotation for a further elaboration of the theme).

98. Snell, Die alten Griechen und Wir, p. 48.

99. Cf. Heraclitus, fr. 40 (Diels~Kranz).

100. Parmenides, fr. 7, 3. ЛHere for the first time sense and reason are contrastedС;
W.K. Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, Vol. Il, Cambridge, 1965, p. 25.

101. This distinction is characteristic of certain mythological views as well. Homer
thus differs both from the preceeding mythologies and from the succeeding
philosophies. His point of view is of great originality. In the 20th century J.L. Austin
has developed similar ideas. And he has criticized the development from Thales vis
Plato to the present essentialism. Cf. the first chapter of Sense and Sensibilia. Chapter 3
of Farewell to Reason contains details.


SIXTEEN 199

The conceptual totalitarianism that arises as a result of the slow
arrival of world B has interesting consequences, not all of them
desirable. Situations which made sense when tied to a particular type
of cognition now become isolated, unreasonable, apparently inconsistent with other situations: we have a Лchaos of appearancesС. The
ЛchaosС is a direct consequence of the simplification of language that
accompanies the belief in a True World.'©? Moreover, all the
manifold abilities of the observers are now directed towards this True
World, they are adapted to a uniform aim, shaped for one particular
purpose, they become more similar to each other which means that
humans become impoverished together with their language. They
become impoverished at precisely the moment they discover an
autonomous ЛIС and proceed to what some have been pleased to calla
Лmore advanced notion of GodС (allegedly found in Xenophanes),
which is a notion of God lacking the rich variety of typically human
features.'? ЛMentalС events which before were treated in analogy
with events of the body and which were experienced accordingly"
become more ЛsubjectiveС, they become modifications, actions,
revelations of a spontaneous soul: the distinction between appearance
(first impression, mere opinion) and reality (true knowledge) spreads
everywhere. Even the task of the artist now consists in arranging his
shapes in such a manner that the underlying essence can be grasped
with ease. In painting this leads to the development of what one can
only call systematic methods for deceiving the eye: the archaic artist
treats the surface on which he paints as a writer might treat a piece of
Papyrus; it is a real surface, it is supposed to be seen as a real surface
(though attention is not always directed to it) and the marks he draws
on it are comparable to the lines of a blueprint or the letters of a word.
Theyaresymbols thatinformthe reader of the structure ofthe object, of its
parts, of the way in which the parts are related to each other. The
simple drawing overleaf, for example, may represent three paths
meeting at a point. The artist using perspective on the other hand,
regards thesurface andthe marks heputsonitas stimuli that trigger the
illusion of an arrangement of three-dimensional objects. The illusion
occurs because the human mind is capable of producing illusory
experiences when properly stimulated. The drawing is now seen
—_____

102. Snell, Ausdriicke, pp. 80f; von Fritz, Philosophie und sprachlicher Ausdruck bei
Demokrit, Plato und Aristoteles, Leipzig—Paris-London, 1938, p. 11.

103 *.. .in becoming the embodiment of cosmic justice Zeus lost his humanity.
Hence Olympianism in its moralized form tended to become a religion of fear ...С,
Dodds, Greets, p. 35. For Xenophanes cf. Chapter 2 of Farewell to Reason.

104. Snell, Discovery, p. 69.


200 AGAINST METHOD
either as the corner ofacube that extends towards the viewer, or as the
corner ofa cube that points away from him (and is seen from below), or
else as a plane floating above the surface of the paper carrying a twodimensional drawing of three paths meeting.

Combining this new way of seeing with the new concept of
knowledge that has just been described, we obtain new entities, viz.
physical objects as they are understood by most contemporary
philosophers. To explain, let me again take the case of the oar.

Inthe archaic view Лthe oarС is a complex consisting of parts some of
which are objects, some situations, some events. It is possible to say
Лthe straight oar is brokenС (not Лappears to be brokenС) just as it is
possible to say Лswift-footed Achilles is walking slowlyС, for the
elements are not set against each other. They are part of a paratactic
aggregate. Just as a traveller explores all parts of a strange country and
describes them in a ЛperiegesisС that enumerates its peculiarities, one
by one, in the same way the student of simple objects such as oars,
boats, horses, people inserts himself into the Лmajor oar-situationsС,
apprehends them in the appropriate way, and reports them ina list of
properties, events, relations. And justas a detailed periegesis exhausts
what can be said about a country, in the same way a detailed list
exhausts what can be said about an object.!°> ЛBroken in waterС
belongs to the oar as does Лstraight to the handС; it is Лequally realС. In
cosmology B, however, Лbroken in waterС is a ЛsemblanceС that
contradicts what is suggested by the ЛsemblanceС of straighmess and
thus shows the basic untrustworthiness of all semblances.'°© The
concept of an object has changed from the concept of an aggregate of
equi-important perceptible parts to the concept of an imperceptible

105. The idea that knowledge consists in lists reaches back far into the Sumerian
past. Cf. von Soden, Leistung und Grenzen Sumerisch-Babylonischer Wissenschaft, new
edn, Darmstadt, 1965. The difference between Babylonian and Greek mathematics
and astronomy lies precisely in this. The one develops methods for the presentation of
what we today call ЛphenomenaС and which were interesting and relevantevents in the
sky, while the other tries to develop astronomy, Лwhile leaving the heavens aloneС
(Plato, Rep., S30bf; Lgg., 818a).

106. Xenophanes, fr. 34.


SIXTEEN 201
essence underlying a multitude of deceptive phenomena. (We may
guess that the appearance of an object has changed in a similar way,
that objects now look less ЛflatС than before.)

Considering these changes and peculiarities, it is plausible to
assume that the comparison of A and B as interpreted by the participants
(rather than as ЛreconstructedС by logically well-trained but otherwise
illiterate outsiders) will raise various problems. In the remainder of
this chapter only some aspects of some of these problems will be
discussed. Thus I shall barely mention the psychological changes that
accompany thetransition from A to Band which are not just a matter of
conjecture, but can be established by independent research. Here is
rich material for the detailed study of the role of frameworks (mental
sets, languages, modes of representation) and the limits of rationalism.

To start with, cosmos A and cosmos B are built from different
elements.

The elements of A are relatively independent parts of objects which
enter into external relations. They participate in aggregates without
changing their intrinsic properties. The ЛnatureС of a particular
aggregate is determined by its parts and by the way in which the parts
are related to each other. Enumerate the parts in the proper order, and you
have the object. This applies to physical aggregates, to humans (minds
and bodies), to animals, but it also applies to social aggregates such as.
the honour of a warrior.

The elements of B fall into two classes: essences (objects) and
appearances (of objects — what follows is true only of some rather
streamlined versions of B). Objects (events, etc.) may again combine.
They may form harmonious totalities where each part gives meaning
to the whole and receives meaning from it (an extreme case is
Parmenides where isolated parts are not only unrecognizable, but
altogether unthinkable). Aspects properly combined do not produce
objects, but psychological conditions for the apprehension of phantoms
which are but other aspects, and particularly misleading ones at that
(they look so convincing). No enumeration of aspects is identical with the
abject (problem of induction).

The transition from A to B thus introduces new entities and new
relations between entities (this is seen very clearly in painting and
Statuary). It also changes the concept and the self-experience of
humans. Anarchaic individual isan assemblage of limbs, connections,
trunk, neck, head, '°7 (s)he is a puppet set in motion by outside forces
—____

107. ЛTo be precise, Homer does not even have any words for the arms and the
legs; he speaks of hands, lower arms, upper arms, feet, calves, and thighs. Nor is there
comprehensive term for the trunk.С Snell, Discovery, Chapter 1, footnote 7.


202 AGAINST METHOD

such as enemies, social circumstances, feelings (which are described
and perceived as objective agencies — see above):'°8 ЛMan is an open
target ofa great many forces which impinge on him, and penetrate his
very core.Ф"Ф? He is an exchange station of material and spiritual, but
always objective, causes. And this is not just a ЛtheoreticalС idea, it is a
social fact. Man is not only described in this way, he is pictured in this way,
and he feels himself to be constituted in this manner. He does not
Possess a central agency of action, a spontaneous ЛIС that produces its
own ideas, feelings, intentions, and differs from behaviour, social
situations, ЛmentalС events of type A. Such an I is neither mentioned
nor is it noticed. It is nowhere to be found within A. But it plays a very
decisive role within B. Indeed, itis notimplausible to assume thatsome
outstanding ; peculiarities of Bsuch as aspects, semblances, ambiguity
of feeling'С® enter the stage as a result of a sizeable increase of selfconsciousness.

Now one might be inclined to explain the transition as follows:
archaic man has a limited cosmology; he discovered some things, he
missed others. His universe lacks important objects, his language lacks
important concepts, his perception lacks important structures. Add
the missing elements tocosmos A, the missing terms to language A, the
missing structures to the perceptual world of A, and you obtain cosmos
B, language B, perception B.

Some time ago I called the theory underlying such an explanation
the Лhole theoryС or the ЛSwiss cheese theoryС of language (and other
means of representation). According to the hole theory every
cosmology (every language, every mode of perception) has sizeable
lacunae which can be filled, leaving everything else unchanged. The hole
theory is beset by numerous difficulties. In the present case there is the
difficulty that cosmos B does not contain asingle element of cosmos A.
Neither common-sense terms, nor philosophical theories; neither
Painting and statuary, nor artistic conceptions; neither religion, nor
theological speculation contain a single element of A once the
transition to B has been completed. This is a historical fact.'"" Is this

108. ЛEmotions do not spring spontaneously from man, but are bestowed on him
by the gods,С ibid., p. 52. See also the account earlier in the present chapter.

109. ibid., p. 20.

110. Cf. SapphoСs Лbitter-sweet ErosС, ibid, p. 60.

111. The fact is not easy to establish. Many presentations of A, including some
very detailed and sophisticated ones, are infected by B-concepts. An example is
quoted in foomote 97 to the present chapter. Here as elsewhere only the
anthropological method can lead to knowledge that is more than a reflection of wishful
thinking. A similar situation in the course of individual developments described in the
text to fn. 12 of the present chapter.


SIXTEEN 203
fact an accident, or has A some structural properties that prevent the
co-existence of A-situations and B-situations? Let us see!

Ihave already mentioned anexample that might give us an inkling of
a reason as to why B does not have room for A-facts: the drawing
below may be the intersection of three paths as presented in
accordance with the principles of A-pictures (which are visual lists).
Perspective having been introduced (either as an objective method or
asa mental set), itcan no longer be seen inthis manner. Instead of lines
on paper we have the illusion of depth and a three-dimensional
panorama, though of a rather simple kind. There is no way of
incorporating the A-picture into the B-picture except as part of this
illusion. But an illusion of a visual list is not a visual list.

Thesituation becomes more transparent when we tum to concepts.
Ihave said above that the ЛnatureС of an object (=aggregate) in A is
determined by the elements of the aggregate and the relation between
the elements. One should add that this determination is ЛclosedС in the
sense that the elements and their relations constitute the object; when
they are given, then the object is given as well. For example, the
ЛelementsС described by Odysseus in his speech in Iliad, 9.225ff
constitute honour, grace, respect. A-concepts are thus very similar to
notions such as ЛcheckmateС: given a certain arrangement of pieces on
the board, there is no way of ЛdiscoveringС that the game can still be
continued. Such a ЛdiscoveryС would not fill a gap, it would not add to
our knowledge of possible chess positions, it would put an end to the
game. And so would the ЛdiscoveryС of Лreal meaningsС behind other
moves and other constellations.

Precisely the same remarks apply to the ЛdiscoveryС of an individual
I that is different from faces, behaviour, objective Лmental statesС of
the type that occur in A, to the ЛdiscoveryС of a substance behind
ЛappearancesС (formerly elements of A), or to the ЛdiscoveryС that
honour may be lacking despite the presence of all its outer
manifestations. A statement such as HeraclitusС Лyou could not find
the limits of the soul though you are travelling every way, so deep is its
logosС (Diels, B 45) does not just add to cosmos A, it undercuts


204 AGAINST METHOD

the principles which are needed in the construction of A-type
Лmental statesС while HeraclitusС rejection of noAvpa@(n and
ParmenidesС rejection of an &0c¢ modtmeigov undercuts
rules that govern the construction of every single fact of A. An
entire world-view, an entire universe of thought, speech, perception
is dissolved.

It is interesting to see how this process of dissolving manifests itself
in particular cases. In his long speech in //ad, 9.308ff, Achilles wants
to say that honour may be absent even though all its outer
manifestations are present. The terms of the language he uses are so
intimately tied to definite social situations that he Лhas no language to
express his disillusionment. Yet he expresses it, and in a remarkable
way. He does it by misusing the language he disposes of. He asks
questions that cannot be answered and makes demands that cannot
be met.С!!? He acts in a most ЛirrationalС way.

The same irrationality is found in the writings of all other early
authors. Compared with A the Presocratics speak strangely indeed.
So do the lyrical poets who explore the new possibilities of selfhood
they have ЛdiscoveredС. Freed from the fetters of a well-constructed
and unambiguous mode of expression and thinking, the elements of
A lose their familiar function and start floating around aimlessly — the
Лchaos of sensationsС arises. Freed from firm and unambiguous social
situations feelings become fleeting, ambivalent, contradictory: ЛI
love, and I love not; I rave, and I do not rave,С writes Anakreon.'!3
Freed from the rules of late geometric painting the artists produce
strange mixtures of perspective and blueprint.'"* Separated from
well-determined psychological sets and freed of their realistic
import, concepts may now be used ЛhypotheticallyС without any
odium of lying and the arts may begin exploring possible worlds in an
imaginative way.''> This is the same Лstep backС which was earlier

112. A. Parry, ЛThe Language of AchillesС, Trans. 5 Proc. Amer. Phil. Assoc., 87,
1956, p. 6. Cf. the discussion of the case in Farewell to Reason, Chapter 10.

113. Diehl, Anthologia LyricaС, fr. 79.

114. Pfuhl, op. cit, cf. also J. White, Perspective in Ancient Drawing and Painting,
London, 1965.

115. Plutarch reports the following story in his Life of Solon:ЛWhenthe company of
Thespis began to exhibit tragedy, and its novelty was attracting the populace but had
Not yet got as far as public competitions, Solon, being fond of listening and learning
and being rather given in his old age to leisure and amusement, and indeed to drinking
parties and music, went to see Thespis act in his own play, as was the practice in
ancient times. Solon approached him after the performance and asked him if he was
not ashamed to tell so many lies to so many people. When Thespis said there was
nothing dreadful in representing such works and actions in fun, Solon struck the
ground violently with his walking stick: “If we applaud these things in fun,Ф he said,


SIXTEEN 205
seen to be a necessary presupposition of change and, possibly,
progress! !6— only it now does not just discard observations, it discards
some important standards of rationality as well. Seen from A (and also
from the point of view of some later ideologies) all these thinkers,
poets, artists, are raving maniacs.

Remember the circumstances which are responsible for this
situation. We have a point of view (theory, framework, cosmos, mode
of representation) whose elements (concepts, ЛfactsС, pictures) are
built up in accordance with certain principles of construction. The
principles involve something like a ЛclosureС: there are things that
cannot be said, or ЛdiscoveredС, without violating the principles
(which does not mean contradicting them). Say the things, make the
discovery, and the principles are suspended. Now take those
constructive principles that underlie every element of the cosmos (of
the theory), every fact (every concept). Let us call such principles
universal principles of the theory in question. Suspending universal
principles means suspending all facts and all concepts. Finally, let us
call a discovery, or a statement, or an attitude incommensurable with
the cosmos (the theory, the framework) if it suspends some of its
universal principles. Heraclitus B 45 is incommensurable with the
psychological part of A: it suspends the rules that are needed for
constituting individuals and puts an end to all A-facts about
individuals (phenomena corresponding to such facts may of course
persist for a considerable time as not all conceptual changes lead to
changes in perception and as there exist conceptual changes that
never leave a trace in the appearances; however, such phenomena
can no longer be described in the customary way and cannot therefore
count as observations of the customary Лobjective factsС).

Note the tentative and vague nature of this explanation of
ЛincommensurableС and the absence of logical terminology. The
reason for the vagueness has already been explained (items 3 and 4
above). The absence of logic is due to the fact that we deal with
phenomena outside ofits domain. My purpose is to find terminology
“we shall soon find ourselves honouring them in earnestФ.С The story seems
historically impossible yet elucidates a widespread attitude (for this attitude cf.
Chapter 8 of John Forsdyke Greece before Homer, New York, 1964). Solon himself
seems to have been somewhat less impressed by traditional forms of thought and he
may have been one of the first dramatic actors (of the political variety): G. Else, The
Origin and Early Form of Tragedy, Cambridge, 1965, pp. 40ff. The opposite attitude,
which reveals the secure and already somewhatconceited citizen of B, is expressed by
Simonides who answered the question why the Thessalians were not deceived by him
by saying ЛBecause they are too stupidС. Plutarch, Deaud. poet, ISD.

116. Chapter 11, text to footnote 5.


206 AGAINST METHOD

for describing certain complex historical-anthropological phenomena
which are only imperfectly understood rather than defining
properties of logical systems that are specified in detail. Terms, such
as Лuniversal principlesС and ЛsuspendС, are supposed to summarize
anthropological information much in the same way in which EvansPritchardСs account of Nuer time (text to foomote 85) summarizes
the anthropological information at his disposal (cf. also the brief
discussion in item 3 above). The vagueness of the explanation
reflects the incompleteness and complexity of the material and invites
articulation by further research. The explanation has to have some
content — otherwise it would be useless. But it must not have too much
content, or else we have to revise it every second line.

Note, also, that by a ЛprincipleС I do not simply mean a statement
such as Лconcepts apply when a finite number of conditions is
satisfiedС, or Лknowledge is enumeration of discrete elements which
form paratactic aggregatesС but the grammatical habit corresponding
to the statement. The two statements just quoted describe the habit
of regarding an object as given when the list of its parts has been fully
presented. This habit is suspended (though not contradicted) by the
conjecture that even the most complete list does not exhaust an object;
it is also suspended (but again not contradicted) by any unceasing
search for new aspects and new properties. (It is therefore not
feasible to define ЛincommensurabilityС by reference to statements.''Ф) If the habit is suspended, then A-objects are suspended
with it: one cannot examine A-objects by a method of conjectures
and refutations that knows no end.

How is the ЛirrationalityС of the transition period overcome? It is
overcome in the usual way (cf. item 8 above), i.e. by the determined
production of nonsense until the material produced is rich enough to
permit the rebels to reveal, and everyone else to recognize, new
universal principles. (Such revealing need not consist in writing the
principles down in the form of clear and precise statements.)
Madness turns into sanity provided it is sufficiently rich and
sufficiently regular to function as the basis of a new world-view. And
when that happens, then we have a new problem: how can the old
view be compared with the new view?

From what has been said it is obvious that we cannot compare the
contents of A and B. A-facts and B-facts cannot be put side by side,
not even in memory: presenting B-facts means suspending principles

117. This takes care of a criticism in foomote 63 of ShapereСs article in Mind and
Cosmos, Pittsburgh, 1966. The classifications achieved by the principles are ЛcovertС in
the sense of Whorf: cf. above. footnote 4 and text down to footnote 9.


SIXTEEN 207
assumed in the construction of A-facts. All we can do is draw Bpictures of A-facts in B, or introduce B-statements of A-facts into B.
We cannot use A-statements of A-facts in B. Nor is it possible to
translate language A into language B. This does not mean that we
cannot discuss the two views — but the discussion will lead to sizeable
changes of both views (and of the languages in which they are
expressed).

Now it seems to me that the relation between, say, classical
mechanics (interpreted realistically) and quantum mechanics (interpreted in accordance with the views of Niels Bohr), or between
Newtonian mechanics (interpreted realistically) and the general
theory of relativity (also interpreted realistically) is in many respects
similar to the relation between cosmology A and cosmology B. Thus
every fact of NewtonСs mechanics presumes that shapes, masses,
periods are changed only by physical interactions and this
presumption is suspended by the theory of relativity. Similarly the
quantum theory constitutes facts in accordance with the uncertainty
relations which are suspended by the classical approach.

At this point it is important to interpret the situation in a
sensible manner of else scientific (cultural) change becomes an
inexplicable miracle. The idea that comprehensive ways of thinking,
acting, perceiving such as cosmology A (and, in a much more narrow
domain, classical physics) and cosmology B (relativity or quantum
mechanics) are closed frameworks with fixed rules creates an
unbridgeable gulf between situations which, though different in
surprising ways, are yet connected by arguments, allusions,
borrowings, analogies, general principles of the kind explained in the
text above. Logicians who confine the term ЛargumentС to chains of
reasoning involving stable and precise concepts and who reconstruct
theories and world-views using equally precise and unambiguous
terms are forced to call such connections ЛirrationalС while their
opponents can report the ЛdiscoveryС that science, that alleged
stronghold of reason, often violates reason in a decisive way. Both are
talking about chimaeras, not about science and culture as they really
are. Things change when we use scientific practice or cultural reality
and not logic as our informants, in other words, when we engage in
sociological research, not in reconstruction. We then discover
that scientific concepts (and concepts, shapes, percepts, styles in
general) are ambiguous in the sense that decisive events can affect
their appearance, their perceived implications and, with them, the
ЛlogicС they obey. Achilles (see the text to footnote 112 above)
ЛmisusesС the language he has at his disposal by asserting a difference
between ЛrealС honour and its social manifestations. Asserting


208 AGAINST METHOD

differences is not in conflict with view A; for example, there isa great
difference between the knowledge, the power, the actions of the gods
on the one side and the knowledge, the power and the actions of
humans on the other. Assuming that honour is in the hands of gods
who donСt give a damn about the aspirations of humans devalues the
social manifestations of honour, makes them secondary. The
assumption fits well into the general outlines of view A but Achilles is
the first to make it. Why? Because his anger, his suffering makes him
see connections which, because of a widespread optimism, are not
part of the general views about honour and do not contribute to its
ЛdefinitionС. He seems to violate basic social rules but viewed with the
anxiety caused by AgamemnonСs actions such rules give way to a
different idea that is regarded as being implicit in the existing material
but as not having surfaced so far. Generalizing, we can say that
concepts have potentialities over and above the usages that seem to
define them; it is this feature that makes them capable of connecting
entirely different conceptual systems. More about this in my (I
promise!) last book, The Conquest of Abundance.


Appendix 2

Whorf speaks of ЛIdeasС, not of ЛeventsС or of ЛfactsС, and it is not
always clear whether he would approve of my extension of his views.
On the one hand he says that Лtime, velocity, and matter are not
essential to the construction of a consistent picture of the universe,
and he asserts that Лwe cut up nature, organize it into concepts, and
ascribe significances as we do, largely because we are partial to an
agreement to organize it in this wayС,Ф which would seem to imply
that widely different languages posit not just different ideas for the
ordering of the same facts, but that they posit also different facts. The
Лlinguistic relativity principleС seems to point in the same direction. It
says, Лin informal terms, that users of markedly different grammars
are pointed by their grammars towards different types of observations
and different evaluations of externally similar acts of observation, and
hence are not equivalent observers, but must arrive at somewhat
different views of the worldС. But the Лmore formal statementsФ of
the principle already contains a different element, for here we are
told that Лall observers are not led by the same physical evidence to the
same picture of the universe, unless their linguistic backgrounds are
similar, or can in some way be calibratedС,> which can either mean
that observers using widely different languages will posit different facts
under the same physical circumstances in the same physical world, or
it can mean that they will arrange similar facts in different ways. The
second interpretation finds some support in the examples given,
where different isolates of meaning in English and Shawnee are said
to be Лused in reporting the same experienceСФ® and where we read that
Лlanguages classify items of experience differentlyС;С experience is

1. Whorf, op. cit, p. 216.

2. ibid, p. 213.

3. ibid., p. 221.

4. ibid, p. 221.

5. ibid,, p. 214, my italics.

6. ibid., p.208.

7. ibid., p. 209.


210 AGAINST METHOD

regarded as a uniform reservoir of facts which are classified differently
by different languages. It finds further support in WhorfСs
description of the transition from the horror-vacui account of
barometric phenomena to the modern theory: ЛIf once these
sentences [Why does water rise in a pump? Because Nature abhors a
vacuum.] seemed satisfying to logic, but today seem idiosyncrasies of
a particular jargon, the change did not come about because science
has discovered new facts. Science has adopted new linguistic
formulations of the old facts, and now that we have become at home
in the new dialect, certain traits of the old one are no longer binding
on usС.® However, I regard these more conservative statements as
secondary when compared with the great influence ascribed to
grammatical categories and especially to the more hidden Лrapport
systemsС of a language.Ф

Whorf and those who follow him regard language as the main and
perhaps as the only Лshaper of eventsС. That is much too narrow a
point of view. Animals have no language in the sense of Whorf, yet
they do not live in a shapeless world. Planets, at least as conceived
today, are not even alive, but they affect their surroundings and react
to them in a lawful manner. In humans rituals, music, the arts,
adaptive behaviour that occurs without the interposition of words
make important contributions to the way in which the world appears
and, to those living accordingly, is. In the sciences we have not only
statements (the old idea that science is a system of statements has by
now been thoroughly discredited), but observations, experimental
equipment, an intuitive relation between observers and their
equipment that has to be learned in a practical way and cannot be
written down, the work of experimentalists which has much in
common with the work of artists - what they want are not merely
results, but results that emerge in a simple, compelling and
aesthetically pleasing way — and so on. A concentration on language
alone, or on ЛtextsС, can easily lead into absurdity, as is shown
by Austin and by the practice of deconstruction: on the one
hand philosophers produce texts, like poets; on the other hand
they take it for granted that their texts reveal a reality beyond the
thoughts, impressions, memories, figures of speech, etc., etc. from
which they arose. (Scientific realists to a certain extent share in this
predicament.)

Finally, some comments on what I think about incommensurability
and how I arrived at the idea.

8. ibid., p. 222.

9. ibid., pp. 68m.


APPENDIX 2 211

I think that incommensurability turns up when we sharpen our
concepts in the manner demanded by the logical positivists and their
offspring and that it undermines their ideas on explanation, reduction
and progress. Incommensurability disappears when we use concepts
as scientists use them, in an open, ambiguous and often counterintuitive manner. Incommensurability is a problem for philosophers
not for scientists, though the latter may become psychologically
confused by unusual things. I arrived at the phenomenon while
studying the carly literature on basic statements and by considering
the possibility of perceptions radically different from our own. In my
thesis! I examined the meaning of observational statements. I
considered the idea that such statements describe Лwhat is givenС and
tried to identify this ЛgivenС. Phenomenologically this did not seem to be
possible; we notice objects, their properties, their relations, not Лthe
givenС. It is of course true that we can give quick reports on the
properties of everyday objects but this does not change them into
non-objects but only shows that we have a special relation to them.
Phenomenologically what is given consists of the same things which
can also exist unobserved — it is not a new kind of object. Special
arrangements such as the reduction screen introduce new conditions, they do not reveal ingredients in objects we already know.
Result: the given cannot be isolated by observation.

The second possibility was to isolate it by logical means: what is
given can be ascertained with certainty, hence | obtain the given
contained in the table before me by removing from the statement
Лthere is a tableС all the consequences that make future corrections
possible. This shows that the given is the result of an unreasonable
decision: untestable statements cannot serve as a basis for science.

Following this argument I introduced the assumption that the
meaning of observation statements depends on the nature of the
objects described and, as this nature depends on the most advanced
theories, on the content of these theories. Or as I formulated it in my
first English paper on the topic: the interpretation of an observation
language is determined by the theories which we use to explain what
we observe, and it changes as soon as these theories change. '"! In a
word: observation statements are not just theory-/aden (the views of
Toulmin, Hanson and apparently also Kuhn) but fully theoretical
and the distinction between observation statements (Лprotocol
—___.

10. Vienna, 1951 — written after two years of extensive discussion in the Kraft
Circle and supervised by Professor Victor Kraft of the University of Vienna.

11. ЛAn Attempt at a Realistic Interpretation of ExperienceС, Proc. Arist. Soc. 1958,
reprinted in Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1. The passage (initalics) is on p. 31.


212 AGAINST METHOD

statementsС in the terminology of the Vienna Circle) and theoretical
statements is a pragmatic distinction, not a semantic distinction;
there are no special Лobservational meaningsС. Thus in the same year
as Hanson (HansonСs Patterns of Discovery appeared in 1958) and four
years before Kuhn I formulated a thesis a weaker form of which
became very popular later on. Moreover, my thesis not only was
stronger than the thesis of theory-ladenness, it also came from a
different source. For while Toulmin and Hanson were inspired by
WittgensteinСs Philosophical Investigations | started from and returned
to ideas that had been developed in the Vienna Circle — and I said
so. Quine, whose philosophy shows close connections to the
philosophy of the Vienna Circle, also used a criterion of
observability that is rather similar to mine.'*

Now when Feigl heard of these ideas he pointed out that
interpreting observations in terms of the theories they are
observations of makes nonsense of crucial experiments; for how can
an experiment decide between two theories when its interpretation
already depends on these theories and when the theories themselves
have no common elements, such as a common observation language?
In the paper just mentioned and in ЛExplanation, Reduction and
EmpiricismС, published in 1962, I took up the challenge. I first
increased it by constructing cases where important terms of one
theory cannot in any way be defined in another which, moreover, tries
to do its job. My example which I found in Anneliese MaierСs Die
Vorléufer Galileis im 14. Jahrhundert was the relation of the terms
ЛimpetusС and ЛmomentumС. | also developed a theory of test to
answer the challenge. In 1962 I called theories such as those
containing ЛimpetusС and ЛmomentumС incommensurable theories,
said that only a special class of theories, so-called non-instantial
theories could be (but need not be) incommensurable and added that
successive incommensurable theories are related to each other by
replacement, not by subsumption. The year 1962 is also that of
KuhnСs great book — but Kuhn used a different approach to apply the
same term to a similar (not an identical) situation. His approach was
historical, while mine was abstract.

In 1960 I started the studies described in chapters 8, 9 and 16.
They revealed tht perception and experimentation obey laws of their

12. Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1, pp. 49, 125.

13, Details in Dirk Koppelberg, Die Aufhebung der Analytischen Philosophie,
Frankfurt, 1987.

14. Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1, pp. 176.


APPENDIX 2 213
own which cannot be reduced to theoretical assumptions and are
therefore beyond the grasp of theory-bound epistemologies.

I also joined Kuhn in demanding a historical as opposed to
an epistemological grounding of science but | still differ from
him by opposing the political autonomy of science. Apart from
that our views (ie. my published views and KuhnСs as yet
unpublished recent philosophy) by now seem to be almost
identical, > except that I have little sympathy for KuhnСs attempt to
tie up history with philosophical or linguistic, but at any rate with
theoretical ropes: a connection with theory just brings us back to what
I at least want to escape from — the rigid, though chimaerical
(deconstruction!) boundaries of a Лconceptual systemС.

15. Cf. my ЛRealism and the Historicity of KnowledgeС, The Journal of Philosophy,
Vol. boawvi, 1989, pp. 353ff, esp. footnote 26 and the postscript to the present essay.


Neither science nor rationality are universal measures of excellence. They are
particular traditions, unaware of their historical grounding.

So far I have tried to show that reason, at least in the form in which it
is defended by logicians, philosophers and some scientists, does not
fit science and could not have contributed to its growth. This is a
good argument against those who admire science and are also slaves
of reason. They must now make a choice. They can keep science;
they can keep reason; they cannot keep both.

But science is not sacrosanct. The mere fact that it exists, is
admired, has results is not sufficient for making it a measure of
excellence. Modern science arose from global objections against
earlier views and rationalism itself, the idea that there are general
rules and standards for conducting our affairs, affairs of knowledge
included, arose from global objections to common sense (example:
Xenophanes against Homer). Are we to refrain from engaging in
those activities that gave rise to science and rationalism in the first
place? Are we to rest content with their results? Are we to assume that
everything that happened after Newton (or after Hilbert) is
perfection? Or shall we admit that modern science may have basic
faults and may be in need of global change? And, having made the
admission, how shall we proceed? How shall we localize faults and
carry out changes? DonСt we need a measure that is independent of
science and conflicts with it in order to prepare the change we want to
bring about? And will not the rejection of rules and standards that
conflict with science forever prevent us from finding such a measure?
On the other hand — have not some of the case studies shown that a
blunt application of ЛrationalС procedures would not have given us a
better science, or a better world but nothing at all? And how are we to
judge the results themselves? Obviously there is no simple way of
guiding a practice by rules or of criticizing standards of rationality by
a practice.

The problems I have sketched are old ones and much more


SEVENTEEN 215
general than the problem of the relation between science and
rationality. They occur whenever a rich, well-articulated and familiar
practice — a practice of composing, of painting pictures, of stage
production, of selecting people for public office, of keeping order and
punishing criminals, a practice of worship, of organizing society — is
confronted by a practice of a different kind that can interact with it.
The interactions and their results depend on historical conditions and
vary from one case to the next. A powerful tribe invading a country
may impose its laws and change the indigenous traditions by force
only to be changed itself by the remnants of the subdued culture. A
ruler may decide, for reasons of convenience, to use a popular and
stabilizing religion as the basic ideology of his empire and may
thereby contribute to the transformation both of his empire and of
the religion chosen. An individual, repelled by the theatre of his time
and in search of something better, may study foreign plays, ancient
and modern theories of drama and, using the actors of a friendly
company to put his ideas into practice, change the theatre of a whole
nation. A group of painters, desirous of adding the reputation of
being scientists to their already enormous reputation as skilled
craftsmen, may introduce scientific ingredients such as geometry
into painting and thereby create a new style and new problems for
painters, sculptors, architects. An astronomer, critical of the
difference between classical principles of astronomy and the existing
practice and desirous to restore astronomy to its former splendour,
may find a way to achieve his aim and so initiate the removal of the
classical principles themselves.

In all these cases we have a practice, or a tradition, we have certain
influences upon it, emerging from another practice or tradition and
we observe a change. The change may lead toa slight modification of
the original practice, it may eliminate it, it may result in a tradition
that barely resembles either of the interacting elements.

Interactions such as those just described are accompanied by
changing degrees of awareness on part of the participants. Copernicus
knew very well what he wanted and so did Constantine the Great (I
am now speaking about the initial impulse, not about the
transformation that followed). The intrusion of geometry into
painting is less easily accounted for in terms of awareness. We have
no idea why Giotto tried to achieve a compromise between the
surface of the painting and the corporeality of the things painted,
especially as pictures were not yet regarded as studies of a material
reality. We can surmise that Brunelleschi arrived at his construction
by a natural extension of the architectsС method of representing
three-dimensional objects and that his contacts with contemporary


216 AGAINST METHOD

scientists were not without consequence. It is still more difficult to
understand the gradually rising claims of artisans to make
contributions to the same kind of knowledge whose principles were
explained at universities in very different terms. Here we have not a
critical study of alternative traditions as we have in Copernicus, or in
Constantine, but an impression of the uselessness of academic science
when compared with the fascinating consequences of the journeys of
Columbus, Magellan and their successors. There arose then the idea
of an ЛAmerica of KnowledgeС, of an entirely new and as yet
unforeseen continent of knowledge that could be discovered, just as
the real America had been discovered: by a combination of skill and
abstract study. Marxists have been fond of confounding insufficient
information concerning the awareness that accompanies such
processes with irrelevance and they have ascribed only a secondary
role to individual consciousness. In this they were right — but not in
the way they thought. For new ideas, though often necessary, were not
sufficient for explaining the changes that now occurred and that
depended also on the (often unknown and unrealized) circumstances
under which the ideas were applied. Revolutions have transformed
not only the practices their initiators wanted to change but the very
principles by means of which, intentionally or unintentionally, they
carried out the change.

Now considering any interaction of traditions we may ask two
kinds of questions which I shall call observer questions and participant
questions respectively.

Observer questions are concerned with the details of an interaction.
They want to givea historical account of the interaction and, perhaps,
formulate laws, or rules of thumb, that apply to all interactions.
HegelСs triad: position, negation, synthesis (negation of the negation)
is sucha rule.

Participant questions deal with the attitude the members of a
practice or a tradition are supposed to take towards the (possible)
intrusion of another. The observer asks: what happens and what is
going to happen? The participant asks: what shall I do? Shall I
support the interaction? Shall I oppose it? Or shall I simply forget
about it?

In the case of the Copernican Revolution, for example, the
observer asks: what impact did Copernicus have on Wittenberg
astronomers at about 1560? How did they react to his work? Did they
change some of their beliefs and if so, why? Did their change of
opinion have an effect on other astronomers, or were they an isolated
group, not taken seriously by the rest of the profession?

The questions of a participant are: this is a strange book indeed —


SEVENTEEN 217
should I take it seriously? Should I study it in detail or only
superficially or should I simply continue as before? The main theses
seem absurd at first sight — but, maybe, there is something in them?
How shall I find out? And so on.

It is clear that observer questions must take the questions of the
Participants into account and participants will also listen most
carefully (if they are inclined that way, that is) to what observers have
to say on the matter — but the intention is different in both cases.
Observers want to know what is going on, participants what to do. An
observer describes a life he does not lead (except accidentally), a
Participant wants to arrange his own life and asks himself what
attitude to take towards the things that may influence it.

Participants can be opportunists and act in a straightforward and
practical way. In the late 16th century many princes became
Protestants because this furthered their interests and some of their
subjects became Protestants in order to be left in peace. When
British colonial officials replaced the laws and habits of foreign tribes
and cultures by their own ЛcivilizedС laws the latter were often
accepted because they were the laws of the king, or because one had
no way to oppose them, and not because of any intrinsic excellence.
The source of their power and ЛvalidityС was clearly understood, both
by the officials and by the more astute of their unfortunate subjects.
Inthe sciences and especially in pure mathematics one often pursues
a particular line of research not because it is regarded as intrinsically
perfect, but because one wants to see where it leads. I shall call the
philosophy underlying such an attitude of a participant a pragmatic
philosophy.

A pragmatic philosophy can flourish only if the traditions to be
judged and the developments to be influenced are seen as temporary
makeshifts and not as lasting constituents of thoughts and action. A
participant with a pragmatic philosophy views practices and
traditions much as a traveller views foreign countries. Each country
has features he likes and things he abhors. In deciding to settle down
a traveller will have to compare climate, landscape, language,
temperament of the inhabitants, possibilities of change, privacy,
looks of male and female population, theatre, opportunities for
advancement, quality of vices and so on. He will also remember that
his initial demands and expectations may not be very sensible and so
Permit the process of choice to affect and change his ЛnatureС as well
which, after all is just another (and minor) practice or tradition
entering the process. So a pragmatist must be both a participant and
an observer even in those extreme cases where he decides to live in
accordance with his momentary whims entirely.


218 AGAINST METHOD

Few individuals and groups are pragmatists in the sense just
described and one can see why: it is very difficult to see oneСs own
most cherished ideas in perspective, as parts of a changing and,
perhaps, absurd tradition. Moreover this inability not only exists, it is
also encouraged as an attitude proper to those engaged in the study and
the improvement of man, society, knowledge. Hardly any religion has
ever presented itself just as something worth trying. The claim is
much stronger: the religion is the truth, everything else is error and
those who know it, understand it but still reject it are rotten to the
core (or hopeless idiots).

Two elements are contained in such a claim. First, one
distinguishes between traditions, practices and other results of
individual and/or collective human activity on the one side and a
different domain that may act on the traditions without being one.
Secondly, one explains the structure of this special domain in detail.
Thus the word of God is powerful and must be obeyed not because
the tradition that carries it has much force, but because it is outside
all traditions and provides a way of improving them. The word of
God can start a tradition, its meaning can be handed on from one
generation to the next, but it is itself outside all traditions.

The first element — the belief that some demands are ЛobjectiveС
and tradition-independent — plays an important role in rationalism
which is a secularized form of the belief in the power of the word of
God. And this is how the opposition reason-practice obtains its
polemical sting. For the two agencies are not seen as two practices
which, while perhaps of unequal value, are yet both imperfect and
changing human products but as one such product on the one side
and lasting measures of excellence on the other. Early Greek
rationalism already contains this version of the conflict. Let us
examine what circumstances, assumptions, procedures — what
features of the historical process — are responsible for it!

To start with the traditions that oppose each other — Homeric
common sense and the various forms of rationalism that arise in the
6th to 4th centuries — have different internal structures.' On the one
hand we have complex ideas that cannot be easily explained, they
ЛworkС but one does not know how, they are ЛadequateС, but one does
not know why, they apply in special circumstances only, are rich in
content but poor in similarities and, therefore, in deductive
connections. On the other side there are relatively clear and simple
concepts which, having just been introduced, reveal a good deal of

1. For details see Chapter 16.


SEVENTEEN 219
their structure and which can be linked in many ways. They are poor
in content, but rich in deductive connections. The difference
becomes especially striking in the case of mathematics. In geometry,
for example, we start with rules of thumb applying to physical objects
and their shapes under a great variety of circumstances. Later on it
can be proved why a given rule applies to a given case — but the proofs
make use of new entities that are nowhere found in nature.

In antiquity the relation between the new entities and the familiar
world of common sense gave rise to various theories. One of them
which one might call Platonism assumes that the new entities are real
while the entities of common sense are but their imperfect copies.
Another theory, due to the Sophists, regards natural objects as real
and the objects of mathematics (the objects of ЛreasonС) as
simpleminded and unrealistic images of them. These two theories
were also applied to the difference between the new and fairly
abstract idea of knowledge propagated by Plato (but found already
before) and the common-sense knowledge of the time (Plato wisely
uses a distorted image of the latter to give substance to the former).
Again it was either said that there existed only one true knowledge
and that human opinion was but a pale shadow ofit or human opinion
was regarded as the only substantial knowledge in existence and the
abstract knowledge of the philosophers as a useless dream (ЛI can see
horses, Plato, said Antisthenes, Лbut I nowhere see your ideal
horseС).

It would be interesting to follow this ancient conflict through
history down to the present. One would then learn that the conflict
turns up in many places and has many shapes. Two examples must
suffice to illustrate the great variety of its manifestations.

When Gottsched wanted to reform the German theatre he looked
for plays worth imitating. That is, he looked for traditions more
orderly, more dignified, more respectable than what he found on the
stage of his time. He was attracted by the French theatre and here
mainly by Corneille. Being convinced that Лsuch a complex edifice of
poetry (as tragedy) could hardly exist without rulesС he looked for
the rules and found Aristotle. For him the rules of Aristotle were not
a particular way of viewing the theatre, they were the reason for
excellence where excellence was found and guides to improvement
where improvement seemed necessary. Good theatre was an
embodiment of the rules of Aristotle. Lessing gradually prepared a
different view. First he restored what he thought to be the real
—____

2. ЛVorrede zum “Sterbenden CatoФС quoted from J. Chr. Gottsched, Schriften zur
Literatur, Stuttgart, 1972, p. 200.


220 AGAINST METHOD

Aristotle as opposed to the Aristotle of Corneille and Gottsched.
Next he permitted violations of the letter of AristotleСs rules provided
such violations did not lose sight of their aim. And, finally he
suggested a different paradigm and emphasized that a mind inventive
enough to construct it need not be restricted by rules. If such a mind
succeeds in his efforts Лthen let us forget the textbook!Ф

In a different (and much less interesting) domain we have the
opposition between those who suggest that languages be constructed
and reconstructed in accordance with simple and clear rules and who
favourably compare such ideal languages with the sloppy and opaque
natural idioms and other philosophers who assert that natural
languages, being adapted to a wide variety of circumstances, could
never be adequately replaced by their anaemic logical competitors.

This tendency to view differences in the structure of traditions
(complex and opaque vs simple and clear) as differences in kind (real
vs imperfect realization of it) is reinforced by the fact that the critics
of a practice take an observer's position with respect to it but remain
participants of the practice that provides them with their objections.
Speaking the language and using the standards of this practice they
ЛdiscoverС limitations, faults, errors when all that really happens is
that the two practices — the one that is being criticized and the one
that does the criticizing — donСt fit each other. Many arguments against
an out-and-out materialism are of this kind. They notice that
materialism changes the use of ЛmentalС terms, they illustrate the
consequences of the change with amusing absurdities (thoughts
having weight and the like) and then they stop. The absurdities show
that materialism clashes with our usual ways of speaking about
minds, they do not show what is better — materialism or these ways.
But taking the participantsС point of view with respect to common
sense turns the absurdities into arguments against materialism. It is
as if Americans were to object to foreign currencies because they
cannot be brought into simple relations (1:1 or 1:10 or 1:100) to the
dollar.

The tendency to adopt a participantСs view with respect to the
position that does the judging and so to create an Archimedian point
for criticism is reinforced by certain distinctions that are the pride
and joy of armchair philosophers. I refer to the distinction between
an evaluation and the fact that an evaluation has been made, a

3. Hamburger Dramaturgie, Stuck 48. Cf., however, LessingСs criticism of the
claims of the Лoriginal geniusesС of his time in Stick 96. LessingСs account of the
relation between ЛreasonС and practice is quite complex and in agreement with the view
developed further below.


SEVENTEEN 221
proposal and the fact that the proposal has been accepted, and the
related distinction between subjective wishes and objective standards
of excellence. When speaking as observers we often say that certain
groups accept certain standards, or think highly of these standards.
Speaking as participants we equally often use the standards without
any reference to their origin or to the wishes of those using them. We
say Лtheories ought to be falsifiable and contradiction freeС and not ЛI
want theories to be falsifiable and contradiction freeС or Лscientists
become very unhappy unless their theories are falsifiable and
contradiction freeС. Now it is quite correct that statements of the first
kind (proposals, rules, standards) (a) contain no reference to the
wishes of individual human beings or to the habits of a tribe and (b)
cannot be derived from, or contradicted by, statements concerning
such wishes, or habits, or any other facts. But that does not make
them ЛobjectiveС and independent of traditions. To infer from the
absence of terms concerning subjects or groups in Лthere ought to
be...С that the demand made is ЛobjectiveС would be just as erroneous
as to claim ЛobjectivityС i.e. independence from personal or group
idiosyncrasies, for optical illusions and mass hallucinations on the
grounds that the subject, or the group, nowhere occurs in them.
There are many statements that are formulated ЛobjectivelyС, i.e.
without reference to traditions or practices, but are still meant to be
understood in relation to a practice. Examples are dates, co-ordinates,
statements concerning the value of a currency, statements of logic
(after the discovery of alternative logics), statements of geometry
(after the discovery of Non-Euclidean geometries) and so on. The
fact that the retort to Лyou ought to do XС can be ЛthatСs what you
think!С shows that the same is true of value statements. And those
cases where the reply is not allowed can be easily rectified by using
discoveries in value theory that correspond to the discovery of
alternative geometries, or alternative logical systems: we confront
ЛobjectiveС value judgement from different cultures or different
practices and ask the objectivist how he is going to resolve the
conflict.* Reduction to shared principles is not always possible and
so we must admit that the demands or the formulae expressing them

4. In the play The Ruling Class (later turned into a somewhat vapid film with Peter
O'Toole) two madmen claiming to be God are confronted with each other. This
marvellous idea so confuses the playwright that he uses fire and brimstone instead of
dialogue to get over the problem. His final solution, however, is quite interesting. The
one madman tums into a good, upright, normal British Citizen who plays Jack the
Ripper on the side. Did the playwright mean to say that our modern ЛobjectivistsС who
have been through the fire of relativism can return to normalcy only if they are
permitted to annihilate all disturbing elements?


222 AGAINST METHOD

are incomplete as used and have to be revised. Continued insistence
on the ЛobjectivityС of value judgements however would be as illiterate
as continued insistence on the ЛabsoluteС use of the pair Лup-downС
after discovery of the spherical shape of the earth. And an argument
such as Лit is one thing to utter a demand and quite a different thing to
assert that a demand has been made - therefore a multiplicity of
cultures does not mean relativismС has much in common with the
argument that antipodes cannot exist because they would fall ЛdownС.
Both cases rest on antediluvian concepts (and inadequate distinctions). Small wonder our ЛrationalistsС are fascinated by them.

With this we have also our answer to (b). It is true that stating a
demand and describing a practice may be two different things and
that logical connections cannot be established between them. This
does not mean that the interaction between demands and practices
cannot be treated and evaluated as an interaction of practices. For the
difference is due, first, to a difference between observer-attitude and
participant-attitude: one side, the side defending the ЛobjectivityС of
its values, uses its tradition instead of examining it — which does not
turn the tradition into an objective measure of validity. And secondly,
the difference is due to concepts that have been adapted to such onesidedness. The colonial official who proclaims new laws and a new
order in the name of the king has a much better grasp of the situation
than the rationalist who recites the mere letter of the law without any
reference to the circumstances ofits application and who regards this
fatal incompleteness as proof of the ЛobjectivityС of the laws recited.
After this preparation let us now look at what has been called Лthe
relation between reason and practiceС.

Simplifying matters somewhat we can say that there exist three
views on the matter.

A. Reason guides practice. Its authority is independent of the
authority of practices and traditions and it shapes the practice in
accordance with its demands. This we may call the idealistic version of
the relation.

B. Reason receives both its content and its authority from practice.
It describes the way in which practice works and formulates its
underlying principles. This version has been called naturalism and it
has occasionally been attributed to Hegel (though erroneously so).

Both idealism and naturalism have difficulties.

The difficulties of idealism are that the idealist does not only want
to Лact rationallyС he also wants his rational actions to have results.
And he wants these results to occur not only among the idealizations
he uses but in the real world he inhabits. For example, he wants real


SEVENTEEN 223
human beings to build up and maintain the society of his dreams, he
wants to understand the motions and the nature of real stars and real
stones. Though he may advise us to Лput aside (all observation of) the
heavensС> and to concentrate on ideas only he eventually returns to
nature in order to see to what extent he has grasped its laws.° It then
often turns out and it often has turned out that acting rationally in the
sense preferred by him does not produce the expected results. This
conflict between rationality and expectations was one of the main
reasons for the constant reform of the canons of rationality and much
encouraged naturalism.

But naturalism is not satisfactory either. Having chosen a popular
and successful practice the naturalist has the advantage of Лbeing on
the right sideС, at least for the time being. But a practice may
deteriorate; or it may be popular for the wrong reasons. (Much of the
popularity of modern scientific medicine is due to the fact that sick
people have nowhere else to go and that television, rumours, the
technical circus of well equipped hospitals convince them that they
could not possibly do better.) Basing standards on a practice and
leaving it at that may forever perpetuate the shortcomings of this
practice.

The difficulties of naturalism and idealism have certain elements
in common. The inadequacy of standards often becomes clear from
the barrenness of the practice they engender, the shortcomings of
practices often are very obvious when practices based on different
standards flourish. This suggests that reason and practice are not two
different kinds of entities but parts of a single dialectical process.

The suggestion can be illustrated by the relation between a map
and the adventures of a person using it or by the relation between an
artisan and his instruments. Originally maps were constructed as
images of and guides to reality and so, presumably, was reason. But
maps like reason contain idealizations (Hecataeus of Miletus, for
example, imposed the general outlines of AnaximanderСs cosmology
on his account of the occupied world and represented continents by
geometrical figures). The wanderer uses the map to find his way but
he also corrects it as he proceeds, removing old idealizations and
introducing new ones. Using the map no matter what will soon get
him into trouble. But it is better to have maps than to proceed without
them. In the same way, the example says, reason without the
guidance of a practice will lead us astray while a practice is vastly
improved by the addition of reason.

—__
5. Plato, Republic, 530bf.
6. Epinomis.


224 AGAINST METHOD

This account, though better than naturalism and idealism and
much more realistic, is still not entirely satisfactory. It replaces a onesided action (of reason upon practice or practice upon reason) by an
interaction but it retains (certain aspects of) the old views of the
interacting agencies: reason and practice are still regarded as entities
of different kinds. They are both needed but reasoncan exist without
a practice and practice can exist without reason. Shall we accept this
account of the matter?

To answer the question we need only remember that the
difference between ЛreasonС and something ЛunreasonableС that must
be formed by it or can be used to put it in its place arose from turning
structural differences of practices into differences of kind. Even the
most perfect standards or rules are not independent of the material
on which they act (how else could they finda point of attack in it?) and
we would hardly understand them or know how to use them were
they not well-integrated parts of a rather complex and in places quite
opaque practice or tradition, viz. the language in which the defensor
rationis expresses his stern commands.С On the other hand even the
most disorderly practice is not without its regularities, as emerges
from our attitude towards non-participants.® What is called ЛreasonС
and ЛpracticeС are therefore two different types of practice, the difference
being that the one clearly exhibits some simple and easily producible
formal aspects, thus making us forget the complex and hardly
understood properties that guarantee the simplicity and producibility,
while the other drowns the formal aspects under a great variety of
accidental properties. But complex and implicit reason is still reason
and a practice with simple formal features hovering above a pervasive
but unnoticed background of linguistic habits is still a practice.
Disregarding (or, rather, not even noticing) the sense-giving and
application-guaranteeing mechanism in the first case and the implicit
regularities in the second a rationalist perceives law and order here
and material yet in need of being shaped there. The habit, also
commented upon in an earlier part of this section, to take a
participantСs point of view with respect to the former and an

7. This point has been made with great force and with the help of many examples
by Wittgenstein (cf. my essay ЛWittgensteinСs Philosophical InvestigationsС, Phil Rev.,
1955). What have rationalists replied? Russell (coldly): ЛI donСt understand.С Sir Karl
Popper (breathlessly): ЛHe is right, he is right -1 donСt understand it either? Ina word:
the point is irrelevant because leading rationalists donСt understand it. J, on the other
hand, would start doubting the intelligence (and perhaps also the intellectual honesty)
of Fationalists who donСt understand (or pretend not to understand) such a simple

int.
ar Cf. my short comments on Лcovert classificationsС in Chapter 16.


SEVENTEEN 225
observerСs attitude towards the latter further separates what is so
intimately connected in reality. And so we have finally two agencies,
stern and orderly reason on the one side, a malleable but not entirely
yielding material on the other, and with this all the Лproblems of
rationalityС that have provided philosophers with intellectual (and, let
us not forget, also with financial) nourishment ever since the ЛRise of
Rationalism in the WestС. One cannot help noticing that the
arguments that are still used to support this magnificent result are
indistinguishable from those of the theologian who infers a creator
wherever he sees some kind of order: obviously order is not inherent
in matter and so must have been imposed from the outside.

The interaction view must therefore be supplemented with a
satisfactory account of the interacting agencies. Presented in this way
it becomes a triviality. For there is no tradition no matter how hardheaded its scholars and how hard-limbed its warriors that will remain
unaffected by what occurs around it. At any rate — what changes, and
how, is now a matter either for historical research or for political action
carried out by those who participate in the interacting traditions.

I shall now state the implications of these results in a series of theses
with corresponding explanations.

We have seen that rational standards and the arguments supporting
them are visible parts of special traditions consisting of clear and
explicit principles and an unnoticed and largely unknown but
absolutely necessary background of dispositions for action and
juugement. The standards become ЛobjectiveС measures of excellence when adopted by participants of traditions of this kind. We have
then ЛobjectiveС rational standards and arguments for their validity.
We have further seen that there are other traditions that also lead to
judgements though not on the basis of explicit standards and
principles. These value judgements have a more ЛimmediateС
character, but they are still evaluations, just like those of the
rationalist. In both cases judgements are made by individuals who
participate in traditions and use them to separate ЛGoodС from ЛEvilС.
Wecan therefore state:

i. Traditions are neither good nor bad, they simply are. ЛObjectively
speakingС, i.e. independently of participation in a tradition, there is
not much to choose between humanitarianism and anti-Semitism.

Corollary: rationality is not an arbiter of traditions, it is itself a
tradition or an aspect of a tradition. It is therefore neither good nor
bad, it simply is.


226 AGAINST METHOD

ii. A tradition assumes desirable or undesirable properties only when
compared with some tradition, i.e. only when viewed by participants
who see the world in terms of its values. The projections of these
Participants appear objective and statements describing them sound
objective because the participants and the tradition they project are
nowhere mentioned in them. They are subjective because they depend
on the tradition chosen and on the use the participants make of it.
The subjectivity is noticed as soon as participants realize that
different traditions give rise to different judgements. They will then
have to revise the content of their value statements just as physicists
revised the content of even the simplest statement concerning length
when it was discovered that length depends on reference systems and
just as everybody revised the content of ЛdownС when it was
discovered that the earth is spherical. Those who donСt carry out the
revision cannot pride themselves on forming a special school of
especially astute philosophers who have overcome moral relativism,
just as those who still cling to absolute lengths cannot pride
themselves on forming a special school of especially astute physicists
who have overcome relativity. They are just pig-headed, or badly
informed, or both.

iii, 1. and 11. imply a relativism of precisely the kind that seems to have
been defended by Protagoras. Protagorean relativism is reasonable
because it pays attention to the pluralism of traditions and values.
And it is civilized for it does not assume that oneСs own village and the
strange customs it contains are the navel of the world.Ф

iv. Every tradition has special ways of gaining followers. Some
traditions reflect about these ways and change them from one group
to the next. Others take it for granted that there is only one way of
making people accept their views. Depending on the tradition
adopted this way will look acceptable, laughable, rational, foolish, or
will be pushed aside as Лmere propagandaС. Argument is propaganda
for one observer, the essence of human discourse for another.

v. We have seen that individuals or groups participating in the
interaction of traditions may adopt a pragmatic philosophy when
judging the events and structures that arise. The principles of their
philosophy often emerge only during the interaction (people change
while observing change or participating in it and the traditions they
use may change with them). This means that judging a historical process
one may use an as yet unspecified and unspecifiable practice. One may base

9. Protagoras is discussed in detail in Chapter 1, sections 3ff of Farewell to Reason.


SEVENTEEN 227
judgements and actions on standards that cannot be specified in
advance but are introduced by the very judgements (actions) they are
supposed to guide and one may even act without any standards,
simply following some natural inclination. The fierce warrior who
cures his wounded enemy instead of killing him has no idea why he
acts as he does and gives an entirely erroneous account of his reasons.
But his action introduces an age of collaboration and peaceful
competition instead of permanent hostility and so creates a new
tradition of commerce between nations. The question — how will you
decide what path to choose? How will you know what pleases you and
what you want to reject? has therefore at least two answers, viz. (1)
there is no decision but a natural development leading to traditions
which in retrospect give reasons for the action had it been a decision
in accordance with standards or (2) to ask how one will judge and
choose in as yet unknown surroundings makes as much sense as to
ask what measuring instruments one will use in as yet unexplored
domains. Standards which are intellectual measuring instruments
often have to be invented to make sense of new historical situations
just as measuring instruments have constantly to be invented to make
sense of new physical situations.

vi. There are therefore at least two different ways of collectively
deciding an issue which | shall call a guided exchange and an open
exchange respectively.

In the first case some or all participants adopt a well-specified
tradition and accept only those responses that correspond to its
standards. If one party has not yet become a participant of the chosen
tradition he will be badgered, persuaded, ЛeducatedС until he does —
and then the exchange begins. Education is separated from decisive
debates, it occurs at an early stage and guarantees that the grown-ups
will behave properly. A rational debate is a special case of a guided
exchange. If the participants are rationalists then all is well and the
debate can start right away. If only some participants are rationalists
and if they have power (an important consideration!) then they will
not take their collaborators seriously until they have also become
rationalists: a society based on rationality is not entirely free; one has
to play the game of the intellectuals.'Ф

An open exchange, on the other hand, is guided by a pragmatic
philosophy. The tradition adopted by the parties is unspecified in the
—___

10. ЛIt is perhaps hardly necessary to sayС, says John Stuart Mill, Лthat this doctrine
(pluralism of ideas and institutions) is meant to apply only to human beings in the
Лmaturity of their facultiesС — i.e. to fellow intellectuals and their pupils. ЛOn LibertyС,
in ThePhilosophy of John Stuart Mill, ed. M. Cohen, New York, 1961, p. 197.


228 AGAINST METHOD

beginning and develops as the exchange proceeds. The participants
get immersed into each otherСs ways of thinking, feeling, perceiving
to such an extent that their ideas, perceptions, world-views may be
entirely changed — they become different people participating in a
new and different tradition. An open exchange respects the partner
whether he is an individual or an entire culture, while a rational
exchange promises respect only within the framework of a rational
debate. An open exchange has no organon though it may invent one,
there is no logic though new forms of logic may emerge in its course.
An open exchange establishes connections between different
traditions and transcends the relativism of points iii and iv. However,
it transcends it in a way that cannot be made objective but depends in
an unforeseeable manner on the (historical, psychological, material)
conditions in which it occurs. (Cf. also the last paragraph of Chapter
16.)

vii. A free society is a society in which all traditions are given equal
rights, equal access to education and other positions of power. This is an
obvious consequence of i, ii and iii. If traditions have advantages only
from the point of view of other traditions then choosing one tradition
as a basis of a free society is an arbitrary act that can be justified only
by resorting to power. A free society thus cannot be based on any
particular creed; for example, it cannot be based on rationalism or on
humanitarian considerations. The basic structure ofa free society is a
protective structure, not an ideology, it functions like an iron railing not
like a conviction. But how is this structure to be conceived? Is it not
necessary to debate the matter or should the structure be simply
imposed? And if it is necessary to debate the matter then should this
debate not be kept free from subjective influences and based on
ЛobjectiveС considerations only? This is how intellectuals try to
convince their fellow citizens that the money paid to them is well
spent and that their ideology should continue to assume the central
Position it now has. I have already exposed the errors-cumdeceptions behind the phrase of the Лobjectivity of a rational debateС:
the standards of such a debate are not ЛobjectiveС they only appear to
be ЛobjectiveС because reference to the group that profits from their
use has been omitted. They are like the invitations of a clever tyrant
who instead of saying ЛI want you to do...С or ЛI and my wife want you
todo...С says ЛWhat all of us want is...С or Лwhat the gods want of us
is...С or, even better, Лit is rational to do...С and so seems to leave out
his own person entirely. It is somewhat depressing to see how many
intelligent people have fallen for such a shallow trick. We remove it by
observing:


SEVENTEEN 229

viii. that @ free society will not be imposed but will emerge only where
people engaging in an open exchange (cf. vi above) introduce protective
structures of the kind alluded to. Citizen initiatives on a small scale,
collaboration between nations on a larger scale are the developments
Ihave in mind. The United States are not a free society in the sense
described here.

ix. The debates settling the structure of a free society are open debates not
guided debates. This does not mean that the concrete developments
described under the last thesis already use open debates, it means that
they could use them and that rationalism is not a necessary ingredient
of the basic structure of a free society.

The results for science are obvious. Here we have a particular
tradition, ЛobjectivelyС on par with all other traditions (theses i and
vii). Its results will appear magnificent to some traditions, execrable
to others, barely worth a yawn to still further traditions. Of course,
our well-conditioned materialistic contemporaries are liable to burst
with excitement over events such as the moonshots, the double helix,
non-equilibrium thermodynamics. But let us look at the matter from
a different point of view, and it becomes a ridiculous exercise in
futility. It needed billions of dollars, thousands of well-trained
assistants, years of hard work to enable some inarticulate and rather
limited contemporaries'' to perform a few graceless hops in a place
nobody in his right mind would think of visiting — a dried out, airless,
hot stone. But mystics, using only their minds, travelled across the
celestial spheres to God himself, whom they viewed in all his
splendour, receiving strength for continuing their lives and
enlightenment for themselves and their fellow men. It is only the
illiteracy of the general public and of their stern trainers, the
intellectuals, and their amazing lack of imagination that makes them
reject such comparisons without further ado. A free society does not
object to such an attitude but it will not permit it to become a basic
ideology either.

x. A free society insists on the separation of science and society. More
about this topic in Chapter 19.

—___
11. Cf. Norman Mailer, Ofa Fire on the Moon, London, 1970.


Yat it is possible to evaluate standards of rationality and to improve them.
The principles of improvement are neither above tradition nor beyond
change and it is impossible to nail them down.
I shall now illustrate some of these results by showing how standards
are and have been criticized in physics and astronomy and how this
procedure can be extended to other fields.

Chapter 17 started with the general problem of the relation
between reason and practice. In the illustration reason becomes
scientific rationality, practice the practice of scientific research, and
the problem is the relation between scientific rationality and
research. I shall discuss the answers given by idealism, naturalism
and by a third position, not yet mentioned, which I shall call naive
anarchism.

According to idealism it is rational (proper, in accordance with the
will of the gods — or whatever other encouraging words are being
used to befuddle the natives) to do certain things — come what may. It is
rational (proper, etc.) to kill the enemies of the faith, to avoid ad hoc
hypotheses, to despise the desires of the body, to remove
inconsistencies, to support progressive research programmes and so
on. Rationality (justice, the Divine Law) are universal, independent
of mood, context, historical circumstances and give rise to equally
universal rules and standards.

There is a version of idealism that seems to be somewhat more
sophisticated butactually is not. Rationality (the law, etc.) is no longer
said to be universal, but there are universally valid conditional
statements asserting what is rational in what context and there are
corresponding conditional rules.

Some reviewers have classified me as an idealist in the sense just
described with the proviso that I try to replace familiar rules and
standards by more ЛrevolutionaryС rules such as proliferation and
counterinduction and almost everyone has ascribed to me a
ЛmethodologyС with Лanything goesС as its one Лbasic principleС. But in


EIGHTEEN 231
Chapter 2 I say quite explicitly that Лmy intention is not to replace one
set of general rules by another such set: my intention is, rather, to
convince the reader that, a// methodologies, even the most obvious ones,
have their limitsС or, to express it in terms just explained, my intention
is to show that idealism, whether of the simple or of the contextdependent kind, is the wrong solution for the problems of scientific
rationality. These problems are not solved by a change of standards
but by taking a different view of standards altogether.

Idealism can be dogmatic and it can be critical. In the first case the
rules proposed are regarded as final and unchangeable; in the second
case there is the possibility of discussion and change. But the
discussion does not take practices into account — it remains restricted
to an abstract domain of standards, rules and logic.

The limitation of all rules and standards is recognized by naive
anarchism. A naive anarchist says (a) that both absolute rules and
context-dependent rules have their limits and infers (b) that all rules
and standards are worthless and should be given up. Most reviewers
regard me as a naive anarchist in this sense, overlooking the many
passages where I show how certain procedures aided scientists in
their research. For in my studies of Galileo, of Brownian motion,
of the Presocratics I not only demonstrate the failures of familiar
standards, I also try to show what not so familiar procedures
did actually succeed. Thus while I agree with (a) I do not agree
with (b). I argue that all rules have their limits and that there
is no comprehensive ЛrationalityС, | do not argue that we should
proceed without rules and standards. I also argue for a contextual account but again the contextual rules are not to replace the
absolute rules, they are to supplement them. Moreover, I suggest a
new relation between rules and practices. It is this relation and not any
particular rule-content that characterizes the position I wish to
defend.

This position adopts some elements of naturalism but it rejects the
naturalist philosophy. According to naturalism rules and standards
are obtained by an analysis of traditions. As we have seen the problem
is which tradition to choose. Philosophers of science will of course
opt for science as their basic tradition. But science is not one tradition,
it is many, and so it gives rise to many and partly incompatible
standards (I have explained this difficulty in my discussion of
Lakatos).' Besides, the procedure makes it impossible for the
Philosopher to give reasons for his choice of science over myth

1. Philosophical Papers, Vol. 2, Chapter 10. Cf. also Chapter 19.


232 AGAINST METHOD
or Aristotle. Naturalism cannot solve the problem of scientific
rationality.

As in Chapter 17 we can now compare the drawbacks of
naturalism and idealism and arrive at a more satisfactory view.
Naturalism says that reason is completely determined by research. Of
this we retain the idea that research can change reason. Idealism says
that reason completely governs research. Of this we retain the idea
that reason can change research. Combining the two elements we
arrive at the idea of a guide who is part of the activity guided and
is changed by it. This corresponds to the interactionist view of
reason and practice formulated in Chapter 17 and illustrated by
the example of the map. Now the interactionist view assumes
two different entities, a disembodied guide on the one side and a
well-endowed practice on the other. But the guide seems disembodied only because its ЛbodyС, i.e. the very substantial practice
that underlies it, is not noticed and the ЛpracticeС seems crude and in
need of a guide only because one is not aware of the complex and
rather sophisticated laws it contains. Thus the problem is not the
interaction ofa practice with something different and external, but the
development of one tradition under the impact of others. A look at the way
in which science treats its problems and revises its ЛstandardsС
confirms this picture.

In physics theories are used both as descriptions of facts and as
standards of speculation and factual accuracy. Measuring instruments
are constructed in accordance with laws and their readings are tested
under the assumption that these laws are correct. In a similar way
theories giving rise to physical principles provide standards to judge
other theories by: theories that are relativistically invariant are better
than theories that are not. Such standards are of course not
untouchable. The standard of relativistic invariance, for example,
may be removed when one discovers that the theory of relativity has
serious shortcomings. Shortcomings are occasionally found by a
direct examination of the theory, for example by an examination ofits
mathematics, or its predictive success. They may also be found by the
development of alternatives (cf. Chapter 3) — i.e. by research that
violates the standards to be examined.

The idea that nature is infinitely rich both qualitatively and
quantitatively leads to the desire to make new discoveries and thus to
a principle of content increase which gives us another standard to
judge theories by: theories that have excess content over what is
already known are preferable to theories that have not. Again the
standard is not untouchable. It is in trouble the moment we discover
that we inhabit a finite world. The discovery is prepared by the


EIGHTEEN 233
development of ЛAristotelianС theories which refrain from going
beyond a given set of properties — it is again prepared by research that
violates the standard.

The procedure used in both cases contains a variety of elements
and so there are different ways of describing it, or reacting to it.

One element and to my mind the most important one is
cosmological. The standards Лwe use and the rules we recommend
make sense only in a world that has a certain structure. They become
inapplicable, or start running idle in a domain that does not exhibit
this structure. When people heard of the new discoveries of
Columbus, Magellan, Diaz they realized that there were continents,
climates, races not enumerated in the ancient accounts and they
conjectured there might be new continents of knowledge as well, that
there might be an ЛAmerica of KnowledgeС just as there was a new
geographical entity called ЛAmericaС, and they tried to discover it by
venturing beyond the limits of the received ideas. The demand for
content increase now became very plausible. It arose from the wish to
discover more and more of a nature that seemed to be infinitely rich
in extent and quality. The demand has no point in a finite world that
is composed of a finite number of basic qualities.

How do we find the cosmology that supports or suspends our
standards? The reply introduces the second element that enters the
revision of standards, viz. theorizing in a general sense, including
myth and metaphysical speculation. The idea of a finite world
becomes acceptable when we have theories describing such a world
and when these theories turn out to be better than their infinitist
rivals. The world is not directly given to us, we have to catch it
through the medium of traditions which means that even the
cosmological argument refers to a certain stage of competition
between world-views, theories of rationality included.

Now when scientists become accustomed to treating theories in a
certain way, when they forget the reasons for this treatment but
simply regard it as the Лessence of scienceС or as an Лimportant part of
what it means to be scientificС, when philosophers aid them in their
forgetfulness by systematizing the familiar procedures and showing
how they flow from an abstract theory of rationality then the theories
needed to show the shortcomings of the underlying standards will not
be introduced or, if they are introduced, will not be taken seriously.
They will not be taken seriously because they clash with customary
habits and systematizations thereof.

For example, a good way of examining the idea that the world is
finite both qualitatively and quantitatively is to develop an
Aristotelian cosmology. Such a cosmology provides means of


234 AGAINST METHOD

description adapted to a finite world while the corresponding
methodology replaces the demand for content increase by the
demand for adequate descriptions of this kind. Assume we introduce
theories that correspond to the cosmology and develop them in
accordance with the new rules. What will happen? Scientists will be
unhappy for the theories have unfamiliar properties. Philosophers of
science will be unhappy because they introduce standards unheard of
in their profession. Being fond of surrounding their unhappiness
with arias called ЛreasonsС they will go a little further. They will say
that they are not merely unhappy, but have ЛargumentsС for their
unhappiness. The arguments in most cases are elaborate repetitions
and variations of the standards they grew up with and so their
cognitive content is that of ЛBut the theory is ad hoc!С or ЛBut the
theories are developed without content increase!С And all one hears
when asking the further question why that is so bad is either that
science has proceeded differently for at least 200 years or that
content increase solves some problems of confirmation theory. Yet
the question was not what science does but how it can be improved
and whether adopting some confirmation theories is a good way of
learning about the world. No answer is forthcoming. And so
interesting possibilities are removed by firmly insisting on the status
quo. It is amusing to see that such insistence becomes the more
determined the more ЛcriticalС the philosophy that is faced with the
problem. We, on the other hand, retain the lesson that the validity,
usefulness, adequacy of popular standards can be checked only by research
that violates them.

A further example, to illustrate the point. The idea that
information concerning the external world travels undisturbed via
the senses into the mind leads to the standard that all knowledge
must be checked by observation: theories that agree with observation
are preferable to theories that do not. This simple standard is in need
of replacement the moment we discover that sensory information is
distorted in many ways. We make the discovery when developing
theories that conflict with observation and finding that they excel in
many other respects (Chapters 5 to 11 describe how Galileo
contributed to the discovery).

Finally, the idea that things are well defined and that we do not live
in a paradoxical world leads to the standard that our knowledge must
be self-consistent. Theories that contain contradictions cannot be
part of science. This apparently quite fundamental standard which
many philosophers accept as unhesitatingly as Catholics once
accepted the dogma of the immaculate conception of the Virgin loses
its authority the moment we find that there are facts whose only


EIGHTEEN 235
adequate description is inconsistent and that inconsistent theories
may be fruitful and easy to handle while the attempt to make them
conform to the demands of consistency creates useless and unwieldy
monsters.Ф

The last example raises further questions which are usually
formulated as objections against it (and against the criticism of other
standards as well, standards of content increase included).

One objection is that non-contradiction is a necessary condition of
research. A procedure not in agreement with this standard is not
research — it is chaos. It is therefore not possible to examine noncontradiction in the manner described in the last example.

The main part of the objection is the second statement and it is
usually supported by the remark that a contradiction implies every
statement. This it does — but only in rather simple logical systems.
Now it is clear that changing standards or basic theories has
repercussions that must be taken care of. Admitting velocities larger
than the velocity of light into relativity and leaving everything else
unchanged gives us some rather puzzling results such as imaginary
masses and velocities. Admitting well-defined positions and
momenta into the quantum theory and leaving everything else
unchanged creates havoc with the laws of interference. Admitting
contradictions into a system of ideas allegedly connected by the laws
of standard logic and leaving everything else unchanged makes us
assert every statement. Obviously we shall have to make some further
changes, for example we shall have to change some rules of
derivation in the last case. Carrying out the change removes the
problems and research can proceed as planned. (Scientific practice
containing inconsistencies is already arranged in the right way.)

But — says an objection that is frequently raised at this point: how
will the results of the research be evaluated if fundamental standards
have been removed? For example, what standards show that research
in violation of content increase produces theories which are Лbetter
than their infinitist rivalsС as I said a few paragraphs ago? Or what
standards show that theories in conflict with observations have
something to offer while their observationally impeccable rivals have
not? Does not a decision to accept unusual theories and to reject
familiar ones assume standards and is it not clear, therefore, that
cosmological investigations cannot try to provide alternatives to all
standards? These are some of the questions one hears with tiring
regularity in the discussion of Лfundamental principlesС such as

2. Cf. Chapter 16, text to footnotes 91ff.


236 AGAINST METHOD
consistency, content increase, observational adequacy, falsifiability,
and so on. It is not difficult to answer them.

Itis asked how research leading to the revision of standards is to be
evaluated. For example, when and on what grounds shall we be
satisfied that research containing inconsistencies has revealed a fatal
shortcoming of the standard of non-contradiction? The question
makes as little sense as the question what measuring instruments will
help us to explore an as yet unspecified region of the universe. We
donСt know the region, we cannot say what will work in it. To advance
we must either enter the region, or start making conjectures about it.
We enter the region by articulating unusual intellectual, social,
emotional tendencies, no matter how strange they may seem when
viewed through the spectacles of established theories or standards. It
would certainly be silly to disregard physical features that do not agree
with deeply ingrained spiritual notions. But it is equally shortsighted
to curtail fantasies that do not seem to fit into the physical universe.
Fantasies and, in fact, the entire subjectivity of human beings are just
as much a part of the world as fleas, stones and quarks and there is no
reason why we should change them to protect the latter.

Similar considerations apply to the standards that are supposed to
guide our thoughts and actions. They are not stable and they cannot
be stabilized by tying them to a particular point of view. For Aristotle
knowledge was qualitative and observational. Today knowledge is
quantitative and theoretical, at least as far as our leading natural
scientists are concerned. Who is right? That depends on what kind of
information has privileged status and this in turn depends on the
culture, or the Лcultural leadersС who use the information. Many
people, without much thought, prefer technology to harmony with
Nature; hence, quantitative and theoretical information is regarded
as ЛrealС and qualities as ЛapparentС and secondary. But a culture that
centres on humans, prefers personal acquaintance to abstract
relations (intelligence quotients; efficiency statistics) and a naturalistsС
approach to that of molecular biologists will say that knowledge is
qualitative and will interpret quantitative laws as bookkeeping
devices, not as elements of reality.

Combining the considerations of the last two paragraphs we see
that even the apparently hardest scientific ЛfactС can be dissolved by
decisions undermining the values that make it a fact and/or by
research that replaces it by facts of a different kind. This is not
a new procedure. Philosophers from Parmenides to 20th-century
(undialectical) materialists and scientists from Galileo and Descartes
to Monod used it to devalue, and to declare as mere appearance, the
qualitative features of human life. But what can be used to support


EIGHTEEN 237
science can also be used against it. The (cultural) measuring
instruments that separate ЛrealityС from ЛappearanceС change and
must change when we move from one culture to another and from
one historical stage to the next, just as our physical measuring
instruments change and must change when we leave one physical
region (one historical period) and enter another.


Science is neither a single tradition, nor the best tradition there is, except for
people who have become accustomed to its presence, its benefits and its
disadvantages. In a democracy it should be separated from the state just as
churches are now separated from the state.

F} How are we to use the sciences and who decides the matter?

My answer to the first question is that the wide divergence of
individuals, schools, historical periods, entire sciences makes it
extremely difficult to identify comprehensive principles either of

In the domain of methodwe havescientists like Salvador Luria who
want to tie research to events permitting Лstrong inferencesС,
Лpredictions that will be stron, sly supported and sharply rejected by a
clear-cut experimental stepС.

According to Luria the experiments (Luria and Delbrueck, 1943)
which showed that the resistance of bacteria to phage invasion is a
result of environment-independent mutations and not of an
adaptation to the environment had precisely this character. There
was a simple prediction: fluctuations, from one culture to the next, of
surviving colonies of bacteria on an agar containing an excess of
bacteriophages would be small in the first case, but would contain

1. S.E. Luria, A Slot Machine, a Broken Test Tube, New York, 1985, p. 115.


NINETEEN 239
avalanches in the second. The prediction could be tested in a simple
and straightforward way and there was a decisive result. (The result
refuted Lamarckism, which was popular among bacteriologists but
practically extinct elsewhere — a first indication of the complexity of
science.)

Scientists inclined in the manner of Luria show a considerable
Лack of enthusiasm in the “big problemsФ of the Universe or of the
early Earth or in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the upper
atmosphereС,Ф all subjects that are Лloaded with weak inferencesС.
In a way they are continuing the Aristotelian approach which
demands close contact with experience and objects to following a
plausible idea to the bitter end.

However, this was precisely the procedure adopted by Einstein, by
researchers in celestial mechanics between Newton and Poincaré, by
the proponents of atomism and, later, the kinetic theory, by
Heisenberg during the initial stages of matrix mechanics and by
almost all cosmologists. EinsteinСs first cosmological paper is a purely
theoretical exercise containing not a single astronomical constant.
The subject of cosmology itself for a long time found few supporters
among physicists. Hubble the observer was respected, the rest had a
hard time:

Journals accepted papers from observers, giving them only the most

cursory refereeing whereas our own papers always had a stiff passage,

to a point where one became quite worn out with explaining points of

mathematics, physics, fact and logic to the obtuse minds who

constitute the mysterious anonymous class of referees, doing their

work, like owls, in the darkness of the night.>
ЛJs itnot really strangeС, asks Einstein, Лthat human beings are normally
deaf to the strongest argument while they are always inclined
to overestimate measuring accuracies?Ф° — but just such an Лoverestimating of measuring accuraciesС is the rule in epidemiology,
demography, genetics, spectroscopy and in other subjects. The
variety increases when we move into sciences like cultural

2. ibid, p. 119.

3. ibid.

4. De Coelo 293a24ff.

5. F. Hoyle in Y. Terzian and E.M. Bilson (eds), Cosmology and Astrophysics, Ithaca
and London, 1982, p. 21.

P &, Jeter to Max Born, quoted from the Born-Einstein Letters, New York, 1971,


240 AGAINST METHOD

anthropology where a compromise has to be found between the
effects of personal contact and the idea of an objective approach on
the one side and the practical needs for quick action and theoretical
thoroughness on the other. ЛTo hear a seminar at a university about
modes of production in the morningС, writes Robert Chambers,

and then attend a meeting in a government office about agricultural

extension in the afternoon leaves a schizoid feeling. One might not

know that both referred to the same small farmers and might doubt
whether either discussion has anything to contribute to the other.С

But is it not true that scientists proceed in a methodical way,
avoid accidents and pay attention to observation and experiment?
Not always. Some scientists propose theories and calculate cases
which have little or no connection with reality. ЛThe great growth
in technical achievements which began in the nineteenth centuryС,
we read in L. PrandtlСs lectures Fundamentals of Hydro- and
Aeromechanics,

left scientific knowledge far behind. The multitudinous problems of

practice could not be answered by the hydrodynamics of Euler; they

could not even be discussed. This was chiefly because, starting from

EulerСs equations of motion the science had become more and more a

purely academic analysis of the hypothetical frictionless Лideal fluidС.

This theoretical development is associated with the names of

Helmholtz, Kelvin, Lamb and Rayleigh.

The analytical results obtained by means of this so called Лclassical
hydrodynamicsС virtually do not agree at all with the practical
phenomena... . Therefore the engineers . . . put their trust in a mass
of empirical data collectively known as the Лscience of hydraulicsС,

a branch of knowledge which grew more and more unlike hydro-

dynamics.®
According to Prandtl we have a disorderly collection of facts on the
one side, sets of theories starting from simple but counterfactual
assumptions on the other and no connection between the two. More
recently the axiomatic approach in quantum mechanics and
especially in quantum field theory was compared by cynical observers
to the shakers, Лa religious sect of New England who built solid barns

7. Rural Development, London, 1983, p. 29.

8. Ed. O.G. Tietjens, New York, 1954, p. 3.


NINETEEN 241
and led celibate lives, a non-scientific equivalent of proving rigorous
theorems and calculating no cross sectionsС.Ф

Yet in quantum mechanics this apparently useless activity has led
toa more coherent and far more satisfactory codification of thé facts
than had been achieved before, while in hydrodynamics Лphysical
commonsenseС occasionally turned out to be less accurate than the
results of rigorous proofs based on wildly unrealistic assumptions. An
early example is MaxwellСs calculation of the viscosity of gases. For
Maxwell this was an exercise in theoretical mechanics, an extension
of his work on the rings of Saturn. Neither he nor his contemporaries
believed the outcome — that viscosity remains constant over a wide
range of density — and there was contrary evidence. Yet more precise
measurements confirmed the prediction. Few people were prepared for such a turn of events. Mathematical curiosity had started
the work, cross-fertilization, not general principles, had brought it
to aconclusion.

Meanwhile the situation has changed in favour of theory. In the
sixties and seventies, when science was still in public favour, theory
got the upper hand, at universities, where it increasingly replaced
professional skills, even in medicine, and in special subjects such as
biology or chemistry where earlier morphological and substancerelated research was replaced by a study of molecules. In cosmology a
firm belief in the Big Bang now tends to devalue observations that
clash with it. ЛSuch observationsС, writes C. Burbidge,

are delayed at the refereeing stage as long as possible with the hope

that the author will give up. If this does not occur and they are

published the second line of defence is to ignore them. If they give rise

to some comment, the best approach is to argue simply that they are

hopelessly wrong and then, if all else fails, an observer may be

threatened with loss of telescope time until he changes his program.'!
190 Rr Streater and A.S. Wightman, PCT, Spin, Statistics and All That, New York,

10. "ror quantum mechanics cf. sections 4.1 and 4.2 of Hans Primas, Chemistry,
Quantum Mechanics and Reductionism, Berlin-New York, 1981. MaxwellСs calculations
are reproduced in The Scientific Papers of James Clerk Maxwell, ed. W.D. Niven, New
York, 1965 (first published in 1890), pp. 377ff. The conclusion is stated on p. 391:ЛA.
remarkable result here presented tous. . . is that if this explanation of gaseous friction
be true, the coefficient of friction is independent of the density. Such a consequence of
a mathematical theory is very starting, and the only experiment] have met with on the
subject does not seem to confirm itС For examples from hydrodynamics cf. G.
Birkhoff, Hydrodynamics, New York, 1955, sections 20 and 21.

11. ЛProblems of Cosmogony and CosmologyС, in F. Bertola, J.W. Sulentic and
D.F. Madore (eds), New Ideas in Astronomy, Cambridge, 1988, p. 229.


242 AGAINST METHOD

Thus all we can say is that scientists proceed in many different ways,
that rules of method, if mentioned explicitly, are either not obeyed at
all, or function at most like rules of thumb and that important results
come from the confluence of achievements produced by separate and
often conflicting trends. The idea that *“scientificФ knowledge is in
some way peculiarly positive and free from differences of opinionС!
is nothing but a chimaera.

The situation in the arts is quite similar — as a matter of fact, it
occurs in all areas of human activity. Cennino CenniniСs Libro
dellСArte of 1390 contains practical advice based on a rich experience
and complex skills. Leon Battista AlbertiСs Della Pittura of 1435/6 isa
theoretical treatise closely tied to central perspective and academic
optical theory. Perspective soon became a mania among artists.
Leonardo and Raphael then pointed out, the one in words, the other
practically (cf. the sphere on the right hand side of his School of Athens
in the Stanza della Segnatura of the Vatican), that a picture that is to
be viewed under normal circumstances, from a comfortable but not
well-defined distance and with both eyes wide open cannot obey the
tules of central perspective. They thereby clarified the difference
between physiological optics and geometrical optics which Kepler,
more than a century later, still tried to bridge by an easily refuted
hypothesis (cf. Ch. 9, text to foomote 50). But central perspective
remained a basis on which various changes were superimposed.

So far I have been talking about procedure, or method. Now
methods that are not used as a matter of habit, without any thought
about the reasons behind them, are often tied to metaphysical beliefs.
For example, a radical form of empiricism assumes either that
humans are the measure of things or that they are in harmony with
them. Applied consistently methodological rules may produce results
which agree with the corresponding metaphysics. LuriaСs procedure
is an example. It did not fail; it helped to build a subject which today is
at the forefront of research. EinsteinСs approach did not end in
disaster; it led to one of the most fascinating modern theories —
general relativity. But methods are not restricted to the area where
they scored their first triumphs. LuriaСs requirements, for example,
also turned up in cosmology; they had been used by Heber Curtis, in
his Лgrand debateС with Harlow Shapely; by Ambarzumjan, who
opposed empiricism to abstract principles; and they are now being
applied by Halton Arp, Margaret Geller and their collaborators.
Whatever the results, a world built up in the manner of Luria has

12. N.R. Campbell, Foundations of Science, New York, 1957, p. 21.


NINETEEN 243
little in common with the world of Einstein and this world again
differs considerably from the world of Bohr. Johann Theodore
Merz describes in detail how abstract world-views using corresponding methods produced results which slowly filled them with
empirical content.'? He discusses the following views. First, the
astronomical view, which rested on mathematical refinements of
action at a distance laws and was extended (by Coulomb, Neumann,
Ampére and others) to electricity and magnetism. LaplaceСs theory of
capillarity was an outstanding achievement of this approach.
Secondly, the atomicview, which played an important role in chemical
research (example: stereochemistry) but was also opposed by
chemists. Thirdly, the kinetic and mechanical view, which employed
atoms in the area of heat and electric phenomena. For some scientists
atomism was the foundation of everything. Fourthly, the physical view,
which tried to achieve universality in a different way, on the basis of
general notions such as the notion of energy. It could be connected
with the kinetic view, but often was not. Physicians, physiologists and
chemists like Mayer, Helmholtz, du Bois Reymond and, in the
practical area, Liebig were outstanding representatives of this view in
the second half of the 19th century while Ostwald, Mach and Duhem
extended it into the 20th. Starting his description of the morphological
view, Merz writes:

The different aspects of nature which I have reviewed in the foregoing
chapters and the various sciences which have been elaborated by their
aid, comprise what may appropriately be termed the abstract study of
natural objects and phenomena. Though all themethods of reasoning
with which we have so far become acquainted originated primarily
through observation and the reflection over things natural, they have
this in common that they — for the purpose of examination — remove
their objects out of the position and surroundings which nature has
assigned to them: that they abstract them. This process of abstraction
is either literally a process of removal from one place to another, from
the great work — and storehouse of nature herself to the small oO
workroom, the laboratory of the experimenter; or — where such
removal is not possible — the process is carried out merely in the realm
of contemplation; one or two special properties are noted and
described, whilst the number of collateral data are for the moment
disregarded. [A third method, not developed at the time, is the
creation of ЛunnaturalС conditions and, thereby, the production of
ЛunnaturalС phenomena.]
—__
13. A History of European Thought in the 19th Century (first published 1904-12).


244 AGAINST METHOD

... There is, moreover, in addition to the aspect of convenience,
one very powerful inducement for scientific workers to persevere in
their process of abstraction. ... This is the practical usefulness of
such researches in the arts and industries... The wants and
creations of artificial life have thus proved the greatest incentives to
the abstract and artificial treatment of natural objects and processes
for which the chemical and electrical laboratories with the calculating
room of the mathematician on the one side and the workshop and
factory of the other, have in the course of the century become so
renowned. ...

There is, however, in the human mind an opposite interest which
fortunately counteracts to a considerable extent the one-sided
working of the spirit of abstraction in science. . . . This is the genuine
love of nature, the consciousness that we lose all power if, to any great
extent, we sever or weaken that connection which ties us to the world
as it is — to things real and natural: it finds its expression in the ancient
legend of the mighty giant who derived all his strength from his oO
mother earth and collapsed if severed from her. .. . In the study of
natural objects we meet [therefore] with a class of students who are
attracted by things as they.... [Their] sciences are the truly
descriptive sciences, in opposition to the abstract ones.'*

Ihave quoted this description at length for it shows how different
procedures rest on and provide evidence for, different world-views.
Finally, Merz mentions the genetic view, the psychophysical view, the
vitalistic view, the statistical view together with their procedures and
their findings.

approaches as well as the clashes between them and it can identify,
Лscience with this complex and somewhat scattered wars on many.
ЛtheС scientific world-view.

4. Ibid., Vol. 2, New York, 1965, pp. 200f.


NINETEEN 245

Expressing it differently we may say that the assumption of a single
coherent world-view that underlies all of science is either a
metaphysical hypothesis trying to anticipate a future unity, or a
pedagogical fake; or it is an attempt to show, by a judicious up- and
downgrading of disciplines, that a synthesis has already been
achieved. This is how fans of uniformity proceeded in the past (cf.
PlatoСs list of subjects in Chapter vii of his Republic), these are the
i that are still rot used es sin“ mapa

Itmay be objected that we live in the 20th century, not in the 19th,
and that many unifications which seemed impossible then have been
achieved by now. Examples are statistical thermodynamics, molecular biology, quantum chemistry and superstrings. These are indeed
flourishing subjects, but they have not produced the unity the phrase
ЛtheС scientific view of the world insinuates. Actually, the situation is
not very different from that which Merz had noticed in the 19th
century. Truesdell and others continue the physical approach:
Prandtl maligned Euler, Truesdell praises him for having provided
rigorous concepts for research. Morphology, though given a low
status by some and declared to be dead by others, has been revived by
ecologists and by LorenzСs study of animal behaviour (which added
forms of motion to the older static forms) and it has always been of
importance in galactic research (HubbleСs classification). Having
been in the doghouse, cosmology is now being courted by high
energy physicists but clashes with the philosophy of complementarity
accepted by the same group. Commenting on the problem M.
Kafatos and R. Nadeu write:

The essential requirement of the Copenhagen interpretation that the

experimental setup must be taken into account when making

observations is seldom met in observations with cosmological import

[though such observations rely on light, the paradigm case of

complementarity).!°
Moreover, the observations of Arp, M. Geller and others have
—___

! 5. John Ziman, Teaching and Learning About Science and Society, Cambridge, 1980,
p. 19.

16. ЛComplementarity and CosmologyС, in M. Kafatos (ed.), BellСs Theorem,
Quantum Theory and the Conceptions of the Universe, Dordrecht, 1980, p. 263.


246 AGAINST METHOD

thrown considerable doubt on the homogeneity assumption which
plays a central role in it. Extended to 1,000 megaparsec, GellerСs
research may blow up the entire subject. We havea rabid materialism
in some parts (molecular biology, for example), a modest to radical
subjectivism in others (some versions of quantum measurement,
anthropic principle). There are many fascinating results, speculations, attempts at interpretation and it is certainly worth knowing
them. But pasting them together into a single coherent ЛscientificС
world-view, a procedure which has the blessings even of the Pope!Ф
— this is going too far. After all, who can say that the world which so
strenuously resists unification really is as educators and metaphysicians want it to be — tidy, uniform, the same everywhere?
Besides, as was shown in Chapters 3ff, a paste job eliminates
precisely those conflicts that kept science going in the past and will
continue inspiring its practitioners if preserved.

At this point some defenders of uniformity rise to a higher level.
procedures — this would be its nominalist interpretation — or it
rationality is either defined in a narrow way that excludes, say, the
arts; then it also excludes large sections of the sciences. Or it is
defined in a way that lets all of science survive; then it also applies to
love-making, comedy and dogfights. There is no way of delimiting
ЛscienceС by something stronger and more coherent than a list.
ЛIcome to the second question — what's so great about science? There
are various measures of greatness. Popularity, i.e. familiarity with
some results and the belief that they are important, is one of them.
Now it is true that despite periodic swings towards the sciences and
away from them they are still in high repute with the general public —
or, rather, not the sciences, but a mythical monster ЛscienceС (in the
singular — in German it sounds even more impressive: Die
Wissenschaft). For what the general public seems to assume is that the
achievements they read about in the educational pages of their
newspapers and the threats they seem to perceive come from a single
source and are produced by a uniform procedure. They know that
biology is different from physics which is different from geology. But

17. Cf. his message on the occasion of the 300th anniversary of NewtonСs
Prin pa published in John Paul IT on Science and Religion, Notre Dame, 1990, esp.


NINETEEN 247
these disciplines, it is assumed, arise when Лthe scientific wayС is
applied to different topics; the scientific way itself, however, remains
the same. I have tried to argue that scientific practice is much more
diverse. Adding that scientists keep complaining about the scientific
illiteracy of the general public and that by the Лgeneral publicС they
mean the Western middle class, not Bolivian peasants (for example),
we have to conclude that the popularity of science is a very doubtful
matter indeed.
approach is ЛscientificС according to some clearly formulated criterion
therefore is no guarantee that it will succeed. Each case must be judged
separately, especially today, when the fear of industrial espionage, the
wish to overtake competitors on the way to a Nobel Prize, the uneven
distribution of funds, national rivalries, fear of accusations (of
malpractice, plagiarism, waste of funds, etc.) put restrictions on what
some dreamers, many Philosophers among them, still regard as a
Лfree intellectual adventureС.С® The question of truth, finally,

remains unresolved. Love of truth is one of the strongest motives for
theory seems to show, in the precise manner so much beloved by the
admirers of science, that reality is either one, which means there are
no observers and no things observed, or it is many, in which case what (o}
is found does not exist in itself but depends on the approach chosen.
What are the views that are being compared with science when it is
declared to be superior? E.O. Wilson, the ЛfatherС of sociobiology,
writes:

religion . . . will endure for a long time as a vital force in society. Like

the mythical giant Antaeus who drew energy from his mother, the

earth, religion cannot be defeated by those who may cast it down. The

spiritual weakness of scientific naturalism is due to the fact that it has

no such primal source of power. . . . So the time has come to ask: does
—___

18. This was realized by government advisers after the postwar euphoria had wom
off. See Joseph Ben-David, Scientific Growth, Berkeley, 1991, p. 525, quoted above.


248 AGAINST METHOD
away exist to divert the power of religion into the services of the great oe)
new enterprise?!?

For Wilson the main feature of the alternatives is that they have

wer. I regard this as a somewhat narrow characterization, World- oO
questions were available to Kepler and Newton and were used by
them in their research; they are no longer available today, at least not
within the sciences. They are part of non-scientific world-views
which therefore have much to offer, also to scientists. When Western
Civilization invaded what is now called the Third World it imposed
its own ideas of a proper environment and a rewarding life. It thereby
disrupted delicate patterns of adaptation and created problems that
had not existed before. Both human decency and some appreciation
of the many ways in which humans can live with nature prompted
agents of development and public health to think in more complex or,
as some would more ЛrelativisticС : =

Let me point out, incidentally, that not all ideas which seem
repulsive to the prophets of a New Age come from science. The idea
of a world machine and the related idea that nature is material to be
shaped by man should not be blamed on modem, i.e. post-Cartesian,
science. It is older and stronger than a purely philosophical doctrine
could ever be. The expression Лworld machineС is found in Pseudo
Dionysius Areopagita, a mystic of unknown identity who wrote about
500 av and had tremendous influence. Oresme, who died in 1382
as bishop of Lisieux, compares the universe to a vast mechanical
clock set running by God so that Лall the wheels move as
harmoniously as possibleС. The sentiment can be easily understood:

19. On Human Nature, Cambridge, Mass., 1972, pp. 192f.

20. Lessons Learned in Community-Based Environmental Management, Proceedings
ofthe 1990 Primary Environmental Care Workshop, ed. Grazia Borrini, International
Course for Primary Health Care Managers at District Level in Developing Countries,
Istituto Superiore di Sanita, Rome, 1991. For a more popular presentation cf. Grazia
Borrini, ЛPrimary Environmental Care: For Environmental Advocates and PolicyMakersС, UNESCO Courier, forthcoming.


NINETEEN 249
tao ae cm White Jr., from whose book I have taken
this information, also describes the change of attitude that occurred
in the Carolingian Age:
The old Roman Calendars had occasionally shown genre scenes of
human activity but the dominant tradition (which continued in
Byzantium) was to depict the months as passive personifications being
symbols of attributes. The new Carolingian calendar which set the
pattern for the Middle Ages .. . shows a coercive attitude towards
natural resources. . .. The pictures [are about] scenes of ploughing,
harvesting, woodchopping; people knocking down acorns for the pigs,
pig slaughtering. Man and Nature are now two things and man is the Oo
master?!
= there are many things we can learn from the sciences. But
we can also learn from the humanities, from religion and from the
remnants of ancient traditions that survived the onslaught of Western
Civilization. No area is unified and perfect, few areas are repulsive
and completely without merit. There is no objective principle that
could direct us away from the supermarket ЛreligionС or the
supermarket ЛartС towards the more modern, and much more
expensive supermarket ЛscienceС. Besides, there are large areas of
knowledge and action in which we use procedures without any idea as
to their comparative excellence. An example is medicine, which,
though not a science, has increasingly been connected with scientific
research. There are many fashions and schools in medicine just as
there are many fashions and schools in psychology. It follows, first,
the idea of a comparison of ЛWestern medicineС with other medical
procedures does not make sense. Secondly, such a comparison is
often against the law, even if there should be volunteers: a test is
legally impossible.
2. This is not really a
rawback. The search for objective guidance is in conflict with the
idea of individual responsibility which allegedly is an important
—___
21. Mediaeval Technology and Social Change, Oxford, 1960, pp. 56f.


250 AGAINST METHOD

ingredient of a ЛrationalС or scientific age. It shows fear, indecision, a
yearning for authority and a disregard for the new opportunities that

now exist: we can build world-views on the basis of a personal choice

and thus unite, for ourselves and for our ggrends, what was once io}
separated by a series of historical accidents.

On the other hand, we can agree that in a world full of scientific
products scientists may be given a special status just as henchmen
had a special status at times of social disorder or priests had when
being a citizen coincided with being the member of a single universal
Church. We can also agree that appealing to a chimaera (such as that
ofa uniform and coherent Лscientific world-viewС) can have important
political consequences. In 1854 Commander Perry, using force,
opened the ports of Hakodate and Shimoda to American ships for
supply and trade. This event demonstrated the military inferiority of

Japan. The members of the Japanese enlightenment of the early

1870s, Fukuzawa among them, now reasoned as follows. Japan can
keep its independence only if it becomes stronger. It can become
stronger only with the help of science. It will use science effectively
only if it does not just practise science but also believes in the
underlying ideology. To many traditional Japanese this ideology —
ЛtheС scientific world-view — was barbaric. But, so the followers of
Fukuzawa argued, it was necessary to adopt barbaric ways, to regard
them as advanced, to introduce the whole of Western Civilization in
order to survive. Having been thus prepared Japanese scientists
soon branched out as their Western colleagues had done before and
falsified the uniform ideology that had started the development. The
lesson I draw from this sequence of events is thata uniform Лscientific
view of the worldС may be useful for people doing science — it gives them
motivation without tying them down. It is like a flag. Though
presenting a single pattern it makes people do many different things.
However, it is a disaster for outsiders (philosophers, fly-by-night
mystics, prophets of a New Age). It suggests to them the most
narrowminded religious commitment and encourages a similar
narrowmindedness on their part.

22. Wolfgang Pauli, who was deeply concerned about the intellectual situation of
the time, demanded that science and religion again be united: letter to M. Fierz, 8
August 1948. I agree but would add, entirely in the spirit of Pauli, that the unification
should be a personal matter; it should not be prepared by philosophical-scientific
alchemists of the mind and imposed by their minions in education. (It is different in the
Third World where a strong faith still survives.)

23. Details in Carmen Blacker, The Japanese E nlightenment, Cambridge, 1969. For
the political background cf. Chapters 3 and 4 of Richard Storry, A History of Modern
Japan, Harmondsworth, 1982.


NINETEEN 251
(2)
(midst to bring them closer to these aims. The objection that science is
self-correcting and thus needs no outside interference overlooks,
first, that every enterprise is self-correcting (look at what happened to
the Catholic Church after Vatican II) and, secondly, that in a
democracy the self-correction of the whole which tries to achieve
more humane ways of living overrules the self-correction of the parts
which has a more narrow aim — unless the parts are given temporary
independence. Hence in a democracy local populations not only will, le)
but also should, use the sciences in ways most suitable to them. The
objection that citizens do not have the expertise to judge scientific
matters overlooks that important problems often lie across the
boundaries of various sciences so that scientists within these sciences
donСt have the needed expertise either. Moreover, doubtful cases
always produce experts for the one side, experts for the other side,
and experts in between. But the competence of the general public
could be vastly improved by an education that exposes expert
fallibility instead of acting as if it did not exist.


The point of view underlying this bookis not the result of a well-planned train
of thought but of arguments prompted by accidental encounters. Anger at the
wanton destruction of cultural achievements from which we all could have
learned, at the conceited assurance with which some intellectuals interfere
with the lives of people, and contempt for the treacly phrases they use to
embellish their misdeeds was and still is the motive force behind my work.
The problem of knowledge and education in a free society first struck
me during my tenure of a state fellowship at the Weimar Institut zur
Methodologischen Erneuerung des Deutschen Theaters (1946),
which was a continuation of the Deutsches Theater Moskau under
the directorship of Maxim Vallentin. Staff and students of the Institut
periodically visited theatres in Eastern Germany.' A special train

1. Like many people of my generation I wasinvolved in the Second World War. This
event had little influence on my thinking. For me the war was a nuisance, not a moral
problem. Before the war I had intended to study astronomy, acting and singing and to
practise these professions simultaneously. I had excellent teachers (Adolf Vogel, my
singing teacher, had an international reputation and taught outstanding opera singers
such as Norman Bayley) and had just overcome some major vocal difficulties when 1
received my draftnotice (I was eighteen at the time). How inconvenient, Ithought. Why
the hell should I participate in the war games of a bunch of idiots? How do I get out of it?
Various attemptsmisfired and I became a soldier. l applied for officersС training toavoid
bullets as long as possible. The attempt was not entirely successful; I was a lieutenant
before the war had come toan end and found myselfin the middle of the German retreat
in Poland and then in East Germany, surrounded by fleeing civilians, infantry units,
tanks, Polish auxiliaries whom 1 suddenly commanded (the higher officers quickly
disappeared when matters became sticky). The whole colourful chaos then appeared to
me like a stage and I became careless. A bullet hitme on my right hand, a second bullet
grazed my face, a third got stuck in my spine, | fell tothe ground, unable torise, but with
the happy thought Лthe war is over for me, now at last I can return to singing and my
beloved astronomy booksС. It was only much later that | became aware of the moral
problems of the entire age. It seems tome that these problems are still with us. They arise
whenever an individual or a group objectivizes its own personal conceptions of a good
life and acts accordingly. Cf. Farewell to Reason, pp. 309ff. This explains the occasional
violence of my arguments.


TWENTY 253
brought us from city to city. We arrived, dined, talked to the actors,
watched two or three plays. After each performance the public was
asked to remain seated while we started a discussion of what we had
just seen. There were classical plays, but there were also new plays
which tried to analyse recent events. Most of the time they dealt with
the work of the resistance in Nazi Germany. They were indistinguishable from earlier Nazi plays eulogizing the activity of the Nazi
underground in democratic countries. In both cases there were
ideological speeches, outbursts of sincerity and dangerous situations
in the cops and robbers tradition. This puzzled me and I commented
on it in the debates: how should a play be structured so that one
recognizes it as presenting the Лgood sideС? What has to be added to
the action to make the struggle of the resistance fighter appear
morally superior to the struggle of an illegal Nazi in Austria before
1938? It is not sufficient to give him the Лright slogansС for then we
take his superiority for granted, we do not show wherein it consists.
Nor can his nobility, his ЛhumanityС be the distinguishing mark; every
movement has scoundrels as well as noble people among its
followers. A playwright may of course decide that sophistication is
luxury in moral battles and give a black-white account. He may lead
his followers to victory but at the expense of turning them into
barbarians. What, then, is the solution? At the time I opted for
Eisenstein and ruthless propaganda for the Лright causeС. I donСt know
whether this was because of any deep conviction of mine, or because I
was carried along by events, or because of the magnificent art of
Eisenstein. Today I would say that the choice must be left to the
audience. The playwright presents characters and tells a story. If he
errs it should be on the side of sympathy for his scoundrels, for
circumstances and suffering play as large a role in the creation of evil
and evil intentions as do those intentions themselves, and the general
tendency is to emphasize the latter. The playwright (and his
colleague, the teacher) must not try to anticipate the decision
of the audience (of the pupils) or replace it by a decision of his
own if they should turn out to be incapable of making up their
own minds. Under no circumstances must he try to be a Лmoral forceС.
A moral force, whether for good or for evil, turns people into slaves
and slavery, even slavery in the service of The Good, or of God
Himself, is the most abject condition of all. This is how I see the
situation today. However, it took me a long time before I arrived at
this view.

After a year in Weimar I wanted to add the sciences and the
humanities to the arts, and the theatre. I left Weimar and became a
student (history, auxiliary sciences) at the famous Institut fur


254 AGAINST METHOD

Osterreichische Geschichtforschung which is part of the University
of Vienna. Later on I added physics and astronomy and so finally
returned to the subjects I had decided to pursue before the
interruptions of the Second World War.

There were the following ЛinfluencesС.

(1) The Kraft Circle. Many of us science and engineering students
were interested in the foundations of science and in broader
philosophical problems. We visited philosophy lectures. The lectures
bored us and we were soon thrown out because we asked questions
and made sarcastic remarks. I still remember Professor Heintel
advising me with raised arms: ЛHerr Feyerabend, entweder sie halten
das Maul, oder sie verlassen den Vorlesungsaal!С We did not give up
and founded a philosophy club of our own. Victor Kraft, one of my
teachers, became our chairman. The members of the club were
mostly students,Ф but there were also visits by faculty members
and foreign dignitaries. Juhos, Heintel, Hollitscher, von Wright,
Anscombe, Wittgenstein came to our meetings and debated with
us. Wittgenstein, who took a long time to make up his mind and
then appeared over an hour late, gave a spirited performance
and seemed to prefer our disrespectful attitude to the fawning
admiration he encountered elsewhere. Our discussions started
in 1949 and proceeded with interruptions up to 1952 (or 1953).
Almost the whole of my thesis was presented and analysed at the
meetings and some of my early papers are a direct outcome of these
debates.

(2) The Kraft Circle was part of an organization called the Austrian
College Society. The Society had been founded in 1945 by Austrian
resistance fighters? to provide a forum for the exchange of scholars
and ideas and so to prepare the political unification of Europe. There
were seminars, like the Kraft Circle, during the academic year and
international meetings during the summer. The meetings took place
(and still take place) in Alpbach, a small mountain village in Tirol.
Here I met outstanding scholars, artists, politicians and I owe my
academic career to the friendly help of some of them. I also began
suspecting that what counts in a public debate are not arguments but

2. Many of them have now become scientists or engineers. Johnny Sagan is
Professor of Mathematics at the University of Illinois, Henrich Eichhorn director of
New Haven observatory, Goldberger-de Buda adviser to electronic firms, while Erich
Jantsch, who died much too soon, met members of our circle at the astronomical
observatory and later became a guru of dissident or pseudo-dissident scientists, trying
to use old traditions for new purposes.

3. Otto Molden, brother of Fritz Molden of the Molden publishing house, was for
many years the dynamic leader and organizer.


TWENTY 255
certain ways of presenting oneСs case. To test the suspicion I
intervened in the debates defending absurd views with great
assurance. I was consumed by fear — after all, I was just a student
surrounded by bigshots — but having once attended an acting school I
proved the case to my satisfaction. The difficulties of scientific
rationality were made very clear by

(3) Felix Ehrenhaft, who arrived in Vienna in 1947. We, the
students of physics, mathematics, astronomy, had heard a lot about
him. We knew that he was an excellent experimenter and that his
lectures were performances on a grand scale which his assistants had
to prepare for hours in advance. We knew that he had taught
theoretical physics which was as exceptional for an experimentalist
then as it is now. We were also familiar with the persistent rumours
that denounced him as a charlatan. Regarding ourselves as defenders
of the purity of physics we looked forward to exposing him in public.
Atany rate our curiosity was aroused — and we were not disappointed.

Ehrenhaft was a mountain of a man, full of vitality and unusual
ideas. His lectures compared favourably (or unfavourably, depending on the point of view) with the more refined performances of his
colleagues. ЛAre you dumb? Are you stupid? Do you really agree with
everything I say? he shouted at us who had intended to expose him
but sat in silent astonishment at his performance. The question was
more than justified for there were large chunks to swallow. Relativity
and quantum theory were rejected at once, and almost as a matter of
course, for being idle speculation. In this respect EhrenhaftСs attitude
was very close to that of Stark and Lenard both of whom he
mentioned with approval. But he went further and criticized the
foundations of classical physics as well. The first thing to be removed
was the law of inertia: undisturbed objects instead of going in a
straight line were supposed to move in a helix. Then came a sustained
attack on the principles of electromagnetic theory and especially
on the equation div B = 0. Many years before the fundamental
debate he produced convincing evidence for mesoscopic magnetic
monopoles. Then new and surprising properties of light were
demonstrated — and so on and so forth. Each demonstration was
accompanied by a few gently ironical remarks on Лschool physicsС and
the ЛtheoreticiansС who built castles in the air without considering the
experiments which Ehrenhaft devised and continued devising in all
fields and which produced a plethora of inexplicable results.

We had soon an opportunity to witness the attitude of orthodox
physicists. In 1949 Ehrenhaft came to Alpbach. In that year Popper
Conducted a seminar on philosophy, Rosenfeld and M.H.L. Pryce
taught physics and philosophy of physics (mainly from BohrСs


256 AGAINST METHOD

comments on Einstein which had just appeared), Max Hartmann
biology, Duncan Sandys talked on problems of British politics,
Hayek on economics and so on. There was Hans Thirring, the senior
theoretical physicist from Vienna, a superb teacher who constantly
tried to impress on us that there were more important things than
science, who had taught physics to Feigl, Popper as well as the
present author and was an early and very active member of the peace
movement. His son Walter Thirring, now Professor of Theoretical
Physics in Vienna, was also present — a very distinguished audience
and a very critical one.

Ehrenhaft came well prepared. He set up a few of his simple
experiments in one of the country houses of Alpbach and invited
everyone he could lay hands on to have a look. Every day from two or
three in the afternoon participants went by in an attitude of wonder
and left the building (if they were theoretical physicists, that is) as if
they had seen something obscene. Apart from these physical
preparations Ehrenhaft also carried out, as was his habit, a beautiful
piece of advertising. The day before his lecture he attended a fairly
technical talk by von Hayek on ЛThe Sensory OrderС (now available,
in expanded form, as a book). During the discussion he rose,
bewilderment and respect in his face, and started in a most innocent
voice: ЛDear Professor Hayek. This was a marvellous, an admirable, a
most learned lecture. I did not understand a single word. . . .С Next
day his lecture had an overflow audience. .

In this lecture Ehrenhaft gave a brief account of his discoveries,
adding general observations on the state of physics. ЛNow,
gentlemen,С he concluded triumphantly, turning to Rosenfeld and
Pryce who sat in the front row, Лwhat can you say?Ф And he answered
immediately. ЛThere is nothing at all you can say with all your fine
theories. Sitzen miissen sie bleiben! Still miissen sie sein!С

The discussion, as was to be expected, was quite turbulent and it
was continued for days with Thirring and Popper taking EhrenhaftСs
side against Rosenfeld and Pryce. Confronted with the experiments
the latter occasionally acted as some of GalileoСs opponents must
have acted when confronted with the telescope. They pointed out
that no conclusions could be drawn from complex phenomena and
that a detailed analysis was needed. In short, the phenomena were a
Dreckeffect - a word that was heard quite frequently in the arguments.
What was our attitude in the face of all this commotion?

None of us was prepared to give up theory or to deny its excellence.
We founded a Club for the Salvation of Theoretical Physics and
started discussing simple experiments. It turned out that the relation
between theory and experiment was much more complex than is


TWENTY 257
shown in textbooks and even in research papers. There are a few
paradigmatic cases where the theory can be applied without major
adjustments but the rest must be dealt with by occasionally rather
doubtful approximations and auxiliary assumptions.* I find it
interesting to remember how little effect all this had on us at the time.
We continued to prefer abstractions as if the difficulties we had
found had not been an expression of the nature of things but could be
removed by some ingenious device, yet to be discovered. Only much
later did EhrenhaftСs lesson sink in and our attitude at the time as well
as the attitude of the entire profession provided me then with an
excellent illustration of the nature of scientific rationality.

(4) Philipp Frank came to Alpbach a few years after Ehrenhaft. He
undermined common ideas of rationality in a different way by
showing that the arguments against Copernicus had been perfectly
sound and in agreement with experience while GailieoСs procedures
were ЛunscientificС when viewed from a modern standpoint. His
observations fascinated me and I examined the matter further.
Chapters 8 to 11 are a late result of this study (I am a slow worker).
FrankСs work has been treated quite unfairly by philosophers like
Putnam who prefer simplistic models to the analysis of complex
historical events. Also his ideas are now commonplace. But it was he
who announced them when almost everyone thought differently.

(5) In Vienna I became acquainted with some of the foremost
Marxist intellectuals. This was the result of an ingenious PR job by
Marxist students. They turned up — as did we — at all major
discussions whether the subject was science, religion, politics, the
theatre, or free love. They talked to those of us who used science to
ridicule the rest - which was then my favourite occupation — invited
us to discussions of their own and introduced us to Marxist thinkers
from all fields. I came to know Berthold Viertel, the director of the
Burgtheater, Hanns Eisler, the composer and music theoretician, and
Walter Hollitscher, who became a teacher and, later on, one of my best
friends. When starting to discuss with Hollitscher I was a raving
positivist, I favoured strict rules of research and had only a pitying
smile for the three basic principles of dialectics which I had read in
StalinСs little pamphlet on dialectical and historical materialism. I was
interested in the realist position, I had tried to read every book on
realism I could lay hands on (including KiilpeСs excellent Realisierung
and, of course, Materialism and Empiriocriticism) but I found that the
arguments for realism worked only when the realist assumption had

4. Cf. Chapter 5 on ad hoc approximations.


258 AGAINST METHOD

already been introduced. Kiilpe, for example, emphasized the
distinction between impression and the thing the impression is about.
The distinction gives us realism only if it characterizes real features
of the world — which is the point at issue. Nor was I convinced by the
remark that science is an essentially realistic enterprise. Why should
science be chosen as an authority? And were there not positivistic
interpretations of science? The so-called ЛparadoxesС of positivism,
however, which Lenin exposed with such consummate skill, did not
impress me at all. They arose only if the positivist and the realist
mode of speech were mixed and they exposed their difference. They
did not show that realism was better though the fact that realism came
with common sense gave the impression that it was.

Hollitscher never presented an argument that would lead, step by
step, from positivism into realism and he would have regarded the
attempt to produce such an argument as philosophical folly. He
rather developed the realist position itself, illustrated it by examples
from science and common sense, showed how closely it was
connected with scientific research and everyday action and so
revealed its strength. It was of course always possible to turn a
realistic procedure into a positivistic procedure by a judicious use of
ad hoc hypotheses and ad hoc meaning changes and | did this
frequently, and without shame (in the Kraft Circle we had developed
such evasions into a fine art). Hollitscher did not raise semantic
points, or points of method, as a critical rationalist might have done,
he continued to discuss concrete cases until | felt rather foolish with
my abstract objections. For I saw now how closely realism was
connected with facts, procedures, principles I valued and that it had
helped to bring them about while positivism merely described the results
in a rather complicated way after they had been found: realism had
fruits, positivism had none. This at least is how I would speak today,
long after my realist conversion. At the time I became a realist not
because I was convinced by any particular argument, but because the
sum total of realism plus the arguments in favour of it plus the ease
with which it could be applied to science and many other things I
vaguely felt but could not lay a finger onС finally looked better to me

5. I remember that ReichenbachСs answer to DinglerСs account of relativity played
an important part: Dingler extrapolated from what could be achieved by simple
mechanical operations (manufacture of a Euclidean plain surface, for example) while
Reichenbach pointed out how the actual structure of the world would modify the
results of these operations in the large. It is ofcourse true that ReichenbachСs account
can be interpreted as a more efficient predictive machine and that it seemed impressive
to me only because | did not slide into such an interpretation. Which shows to what
extent the force of arguments depends on irrational changes of attitude.


TWENTY 259
than the sum total of positivism plus the arguments one could offer
for it plus . . . etc., etc. The comparison and the final decision had
much in common with the comparison of life in different countries
(weather, character of people, melodiousness of language, food,
laws, institutions, weather, etc., etc.) and the final decision to take a
job and to start life in one of them. Experiences such as these have
played a decisive role in my attitude towards rationalism.

While I accepted realism I did not accept dialectics and historical
materialism — my predilection for abstract arguments (another
positivist hangover) was still too strong for that. Today StalinСs rules
seem to me preferable by far to the complicated and epicycle-ridden
standards of our modern friends of reason.

From the very beginning of our discussion Hollitscher made it
clear that he was a communist and that he would try to convince me of
the intellectual and social advantages of dialectical and historical
materialism. There was none of the mealy-mouthed ЛI may be wrong,
you may be right — but together we shall find the truthС talk with which
ЛcriticalС rationalists embroider their attempts at indoctrination but
which they forget the moment their position is seriously endangered.
Nor did Hollitscher use unfair emotional or intellectual pressures.
Of course, he criticized my attitude but our personal relations have
not suffered from my reluctance to follow him in every respect. This
is why Walter Hollitscher is a teacher while Popper, whom I also
came to know quite well, is a mere propagandist.

At some point of our acquaintance Hollitscher asked me whether I
would like to become a production assistant of Brecht — apparently
there was a position available and I was being considered for it. I
declined. For a while I thought that this was one of the biggest
mistakes of my life. Enriching and changing knowledge, emotions,
attitudes through the arts now seems to me a much more fruitful
enterprise and also much more humane than the attempf to influence
minds (and nothing else) by words (and nothing else). Reading about
the tensions inside the Brecht Circle, the almost religious attitude of
some of its members, I now think that I escaped just in time.

(6) During a lecture (on Descartes) I gave at the Austrian College
Society I met Elizabeth Anscombe, a powerful and, to some people,
forbidding British philosopher who had come to Vienna to learn
German for her translation of WittgensteinСs works. She gave me
manuscripts of WittgensteinСs later writings and discussed them with
me. The discussions extended over months and occasionally
proceeded from morning over lunch until late into the evening. They
had a profound influence upon me though it is not at all easy to
specify particulars. On one occasion which I remember vividly


260 AGAINST METIIOD

Anscombe, by a series of skilful questions, made me see how our
conception (and even our perceptions) of well-defined and apparently
self-contained facts may depend on circumstances not apparent in
them. There are entities such as physical objects which obey a
Лconservation principleС in the sense that they retain their identity
through a variety of manifestations and even when theyare not present
at all while other entities such as pains and after-images are
ЛannihilatedС with their disappearance. The conservation principles
may change from one developmental stage of the human organism to
another® and theymay be different for differentlanguages (cf. WhorfСs
Лcovert classificationsС as described in Chapter 16). I conjectured that
such principles would playanimportant role inscience, thatthey might
change during revolutions and that deductive relations between prerevolutionary and post-revolutionary theories might be broken off as a
result. I explained this early versionof incommensurabilityin PopperСs
seminar (1952) and toa small group of people in AnscombeСs flat in
Oxford (also in 1952 with Geach, von Wright and L.L. Hart present)
but I was not able to arouse much enthusiasm on either occasion.
WittgensteinСs emphasis on the need for concrete research and his
objections to abstract reasoning (ЛLook, donСt think!) somewhat
clashed with my own tendency towards abstractness and the papers in
which his influence is noticeable are therefore mixtures of concrete
examples and sweeping principles.С Wittgenstein was prepared totake
me on as astudent in Cambridge but he died before I arrived. Popper
became my supervisor instead.

(7) [had met Popper in Alpbach in 1948. I admired his freedom of
manners, his cheek, his disrespectful attitude towards the German
philosophers who gave the proceedings weight in more senses than
one, his sense of humour (yes, the relatively unknown Karl Popper of
1948 was very different from the established Sir Karl of later years)
and I also admired his ability to restate ponderous problems in simple
and journalistic language. Here was a free mind, joyfully putting
forth his ideas, unconcerned aboutthe reaction of the Лprofessionals.С
Things were different as regards these ideas themselves. The
members of our circle knew deductivism from Kraft who had written
about it before Popper,® the falsificationist philosophy was taken for

6. Cf. Chapter 16, text to footnotes 12ff.

7. For details cf. my comments on these papers in Der Wissenschaftstheoretische
Realismus und die Autoritat der Wissenschaften, Vieweg Wiesbaden, 1978.

8. Cf. my review of KraftСs Erkenntnislehre in BJPS, Vol. 13, 1963, pp. 319ff. and
esp. p. 321, second paragraph. Cf. also the references in Popper, Logic of Scientific
Discovery. MillСs System of Logic, Vol. 2, London, 1879, Chapter 14, gives a detailed
account of the procedure.


TWENTY 261
granted in the physics seminar of the conference under the
chairmanship of Arthur March and so we did not understand what all
the fuss was about. ЛPhilosophy must be in a desperate stateС, we said,
Лif trivialities such as these can count as major discoveries.С Popper
himself did not seem to think too much of his philosophy of science at
the time for when asked to send us a list of publications he included
the Open Society but not the Logic of Scientific Discovery.

While in London I read WittgensteinСs Philosophical Investigations
in detail. Being of a rather pedantic turn of mind | rewrote the
book so that it looked more like a treatise with a continuous
argument. Part of this treatise was translated by Anscombe into
English and published as a review by Philosophical Review in 1955. I
also visited PopperСs seminar at the LSE. PopperСs ideas were similar
to those of Wittgenstein but they were more abstract and anaemic.
This did not deter me but increased my own tendencies to
abstraction and dogmatism. At the end of my stay in London Popper
invited me to become his assistant. I declined despite the fact that
I was broke and did not know where my next meal was going to
come from. My decision was not based on any clearly recognizable train of thought but I guess that having no fixed philosophy I
preferred stumbling around in the world of ideas at my own speed
to being guided by the ritual of a Лrational debateС. Again I was
lucky. Joseph Agassi who got the job did not have much privacy.
Two years later Popper, Schrédinger and my own big mouth got
me a job in Bristol where I started lecturing on the philosophy of
science.

(8) I had studied theatre, history, mathematics, physics and
astronomy; I had never studied philosophy. The prospect of having to
address a large audience of eager young people did not exactly fill my
heart with joy. One week before the lectures started I sat down and
wrote everything I knew on a piece of paper. It hardly filled a page.
Agassi came up with some excellent advice: ЛLook, Paul,С he said, Лthe
first line, this is your first lecture; the second line, this is your second
lecture — and so on.С I took his advice and fared rather well except
that my lectures became a stale collection of wisecracks from
Wittgenstein, Bohr, Popper, Dingler, Eddington and others. While
in Bristol I continued my studies of the quantum theory. I found that
important physical principles rested on methodological assumptions
that are violated whenever physics advances: physics gets authority
from ideas it propagates but never obeys in actual research,
methodologists play the role of publicity agents whom physicists hire
to praise their results but whom they would not permit access to the
enterprise itself. That falsificationism is not a solution became very


262 AGAINST METHOD

clear in discussions with David Bohm who gave a Hegelian account
of the relation between theories, their evidence, and their
successors.Ф The material of Chapter 3 is the result of these
discussions (I first published it in 1961).'° KuhnСs remarks on the
omnipresence of anomalies fitted these difficulties rather nicely''
but I still tried to find general rules that would cover all cases'? and
non-scientific developments as well.'? Two events made me realize
the futility of such attempts. One was a discussion with Professor
CF. von Weizsacker in Hamburg (1965) on the foundations of the
quantum theory. Von Weizsicker showed how quantum mechanics
arose from concrete research while I complained, on general
methodological grounds, that important alternatives had been
omitted. The arguments supporting my complaint were quite good —
they are the arguments summarized in Chapter 3 — but it was
suddenly clear to me that imposed without regard to circumstances
they were a hindrance rather than a help: a person trying to solve a
problem whether in science or elsewhere must be given complete
Sreedom and cannot be restricted by any demands, norms, however
plausible they may seem to the logician or the philosopher who has
thought them out in the privacy of his study. Norms and demands
must be checked by research, not by appeal to theories of rationality.
Ina lengthy article'* I explained how Bohr had used this philosophy
and how it differs from more abstract procedures. Thus Professor
von Weizsacker has prime responsibility for my change to
ЛanarchismС — though he was not at all pleased when I told him so
in 1977.

9. Ihave explained the Hegelianism of Bohm in the essay ЛAgainst Method? which
appeared in Vol. 4 of the Minnesota Studies for the Philosophy of Science, 1970.

10. Popper once remarked (in a discussion at the Minnesota Center for the
Philosophy of Science in the year 1962) that the example of Brownian motion is just
another version of DuhemСs example (conflict between specific laws such as KeplerСs
laws and general theories such as NewtonСs theory). But there is a most important
difference. The deviations from Kepler's laws are in principle observable (Лin
principleС meaning Лgiven the known laws of natureС) while the microscopic deviations
from the second law of thermodynamics are not (measuring instruments are subjected
to the same fluctuations as the things they are supposed to measure). Here we cannot
do without an alternative theory. Cf. Chapter 4, fn. 2.

11. 1 read KuhnСs book in manuscript in 1960 and discussed it extensively with
Kuhn.

12. Cf. theaccountin ЛReply to CriticismС, Boston Studies, Vol. 2, 1965.

13. Cf. ЛOn the Improvement of the Sciences and the Arts and the Possible
Identity of the TwoС in Boston Studies, Vol. 3, 1967.

14. On a Recent Critique of ComplementarityС, Philosophy of Science 1968/69
(two parts).


TWENTY 263

(9) The second event that prompted me to move away from
rationalism and to become suspicious of all intellectual pretensions
was quite different. To explain it, let me start with some general
observations. The way in which social problems, problems of energy
distribution, ecology, education, care for the old and so on are
ЛsolvedС in First World societies can be roughly described in the
following way. A problem arises. Nothing is done about it. People get
concerned. Politicians broadcast this concern. Experts are called in.
They develop theories and plans based on them. Power-groups with
experts of their own eff ectvarious modifications until a watered down
version is accepted and realized. The role of experts in this process
has gradually increased. We have now a situation where social and
psychological theories of human thought and action have taken the
place of this thought and action itself. Instead of asking the people
involved in a problematic situation, developers, educators, technologists and sociologists get their information about Лwhat these
people really want and needС from theoretical studies carried out by
their esteemed colleagues in what they think are the relevant fields.
Not live human beings, but abstract models are consulted; not the
target population decides, but the producers of the models.
Intellectuals all over the world take it for granted that their models
will be more intelligent, make better suggestions, have a better grasp
of the reality of humans than these humans themselves. What has this
situation got to do with me?

From 1958 to 1990 I was a Professor of Philosophy at the
University of California in Berkeley. My function was to carry out the
educational policies of the State of California which means I had to
teach people what a small group of white intellectuals had decided
was knowledge. I hardly ever thought about this function and I would
not have taken it very seriously had I been informed. I told the
students what I had learned, I arranged the material in a way that
seemed plausible and interesting to me — and that was all I did. Of
course, I had also some Лideas of my ownС — but these ideas moved in a
fairly narrow domain (though some of my friends said even then that I
was going batty).

In the years around 1964 Mexicans, blacks, Indians entered the
University as a result of new educational policies. There they sat,
partly curious, partly disdainful, partly simply confused hoping to get
an ЛeducationС. What an opportunity for a prophet in search of a
following! What an opportunity, my rationalist friends told me, to
contribute to the spreading of reason and the improvement of
mankind! What a marvellous opportunity for a new wave of
enlightenment! I felt very differently. For it now dawned on me that


264 AGAINST METHOD
the intricate arguments and the wonderful stories I had so far told to
my more or less sophisticated audience might just be dreams,
reflections of the conceit of a small group who had succeeded in
enslaving everyone else with their ideas. Who was I to tell these
people what and how to think? I did not know their problems though I
knew they had many. I was not familiar with their interests, their
feelings, their fears though I knew thatthey were eager to learn. Were
the arid sophistications which philosophers had managed to
accumulate over the ages and which liberals had surrounded with
schmaltzy phrases to make them palatable the right thing to offer to
people who had been robbed of their land, their culture, their dignity
and who were now supposed first to absorb and then to repeat the
anaemic ideas of the mouthpieces of their oh so human captors?
They wanted to know, they wanted to learn, they wanted to
understand the strange world around them — did they not deserve
better nourishment? Their ancestors had developed cultures of their
own, colourful languages, harmonious views of the relation between
people, and between people and nature whose remnants are a living
criticism of the tendencies of separation, analysis, self-centredness
inherent in Western thought. These cultures have important
achievements in what is today called sociology, psychology,
medicine, they express ideals of life and possibilities of human
existence. Yet they were never examined with the respect they deserved
except by a small number of outsiders; they were ridiculed and
replaced as a matter of course first by the religion of brotherly love
and then by the religion of science or else they were defused by a
variety of ЛinterpretationsС. Now there was much talk of liberation, of
racial equality — but what did it mean? Did it mean the equality of
these traditions and the traditions of the white man? It did not.
Equality meant that the members of different races and cultures now
had the wonderful chance to participate in the white manСs manias,
they had the chance to participate in his science, his technology, his
medicine, his politics. These were the thoughts that went through my
head as I looked at my audience and they made me recoil in revulsion
and terror from the task I was supposed to perform. For the task — this
now became clear to me — was that of a very refined, very
sophisticated slavedriver. And a slavedriver I did not want to be.
Experiences such as these convinced me that intellectual
procedures which approach a problem through concepts are on the
wrong track and I became interested in the reasons for the
tremendous power this error has now over minds. I started examining
the rise of intellectualism in Ancient Greece and the causes that
brought it about. I wanted to know what it is that makes people who


TWENTY 265
have a rich and complex culture fall for dry abstractions and multilate
their traditions, their thought, their language so that they can
accommodate the abstractions. I wanted to know how intellectuals
manage to get away with murder — for it is murder, murder of minds
and cultures that is committed year in year out at schools,
universities, educational missions in foreign countries. The trend
must be reversed, I thought, we must start learning from those we
have enslaved for they have much to offer and, at any rate, they have
the right to live as they see fit even if they are not as pushy about their
rights and their views as their Western conquerors have always been.
In 1964-5 when these ideas first occurred to me I tried to find an
intellectual solution to my misgivings, that is, I took it for granted that
it was up to me and the likes of me to devise educational policies for
other people. I envisaged a new kind of education that would live
from a rich reservoir of different points of view permitting the choice
of traditions most advantageous to the individual. The teacherСs task
would consist in facilitating the choice, not in replacing it by some
ЛtruthС of his own. Such a reservoir, I thought, would have much in
common with a theatre of ideas as imagined by Piscator and Brecht
and it would lead to the development of a great variety of means of
presentation. The ЛobjectiveС scientific account would be one way of
presenting a case, a play another way (remember that for Aristotle
tragedy is Лmore philosophicalС than history because it reveals the
structure of the historical process and not only its accidental details), a
novel still another way. Why should knowledge be shown in the
garment of academic prose and reasoning? Had not Plato observed
that written sentences in a book are but transitory stages of a complex
process of growth that contains gestures, jokes, asides, emotions and
had he not tried to catch this process by means of the dialogue? And
were there not different forms of knowledge, some much more
detailed and realistic than what arose as ЛrationalismС in the 7th and
6th century in Greece? Then there was Dadaism. I had studied
Dadaism after the Second World War. What attracted me to this
movement was the style its inventors used when not engaged in
Dadaistic activities. It was clear, luminous, simple without being
banal, precise without being narrow; it was a style adapted to the
expression of thought as well as of emotion. I connected this style
with the Dadaistic exercises themselves. Assume you tear language
apart, you live for days and weeks in a world of cacophonic sounds,
jumbled words, nonsensical events. Then, after this preparation, you
sit down and write: Лthe cat is on the matС. This simple sentence
which we usually utter without thought, like talking machines (and
much of our talk is indeed routine), now seems like the creation of an


266 AGAINST METHOD

entire world: God said let there be light, and there was light. Nobody
in modern times has understood the miracle of language and thought
as well as the Dadaists for nobody has been able to imagine, let alone
create, a world in which they play no role. Having discovered the
nature of a /iving order, of a reason that is not merely mechanical, the
Dadaists soon noticed the deterioration of such an order into routine.
They diagnosed the deterioration of language that preceded the First
World War and created the mentality that made it possible. After the
diagnosis their exercises assumed another, more sinister meaning.
They revealed the frightening similarity between the language of the
foremost commercial travellers in ЛimportanceС, the language of
philosophers, politicians, theologians, and brute inarticulation. The
praise of honour, patriotism, truth, rationality, honesty that fills our
schools, pulpits, political meetings imperceptibly merges into inarticulation no matter how much it has been wrapped into literary language
and no matter how hard its authors try to copy the style of the classics,
and the authors themselves are in the end hardly distinguishable
from a pack of grunting pigs. Is there a way to prevent such
deterioration? I thought there was. I thought that regarding all
achievements as transitory, restricted and personal and every truth as
created by our love for it and not as ЛfoundС would prevent the
deterioration of once promising fairy-tales and I also thought that it
was necessary to develop a new philosophy or a new religion to give
substance to this unsystematic conjecture.

I now realize that these considerations were just another example of
intellectualistic conceit and folly. It is conceited to assume that one
has solutions for people whose lives one does not share and whose
problems one does not know. It is foolish to assume that such an
exercise in distant humanitarianism will have effects pleasing to the
people concerned. From the very beginning of Western Rationalism
intellectuals have regarded themselves as teachers, the world as a
school and ЛpeopleС as obedient pupils. In Plato this is very clear. The
same phenomenon occurs among Christians, Rationalists, Fascists,
Marxists. Marxists did not try to learn from those they wanted to
liberate; they attacked each other about interpretations, viewpoints,
evidence and took it for granted that the resulting intellectual hash
would make fine food for the natives (Bakunin was aware of the
doctrinarian tendencies of contemporary Marxism and he intended
to return all power — power over ideas included — to the people
immediately concerned). My own view differed from those just
mentioned but it was still a view, an abstract fancy I had invented and
now tried to sell without having shared even an ounce of the lives of


TWENTY 267
the receivers. This I now regard as insufferable conceit. So — what
remains?

Two things remain. I could follow my own advice to address and
try to influence only those people whom I think I understand on a
personal basis. This includes some of my friends; it may include
philosophers I have not met but who seem to be interested in similar
problems and who are not too upset by my style and my general
approach. It may also include people from different cultures who are
attracted, even fascinated by Western science and Western
intellectual life, who have started participating in it but who still
remember, in thought as well as in feeling the life of the culture they
left behind. My account might lessen the emotional tension they are
liable to feel and make them see a way of uniting, rather than
opposing to each other, the various stages of their lives.

Another possibility is a change of subject. I started my career as a
student of acting, theatre production and singing at the Institute for
the Methodological Reformation of the German Theatre in the
German Democratic Republic. This appealed to my intellectualism
and my dramatic propensities. My intellectualism told me that
problems had to be solved by thought. My dramatic propensities
made me think that hamming it up was better than going through an
abstract argument. There is of course no conflict here for argument
without illustration leads away from the human elements which affect
the most abstract problems. The arts, as I see them today, are not a
domain separated from abstract thought, but complementary to it
and needed to fully realize its potential. Examining this function of
the arts and trying to establish a mode of research that unites their
power with that of science and religion seems to be a fascinating
enterprise and one to which I might devote a year (or two, or
three . . .).


Postscript on Relativism

In a critical notice of my book Farewell to Reason Andrew Lugg
suggests Лthat Feyerabend and likeminded social critics should treat
relativism with the disdain that they normally reserve for rationalismС.! This I have now done, in Three Dialogues of Knowledge?
where I say that relativism gives an excellent account of the relation
between dogmatic world-views but is only a first step towards an
understanding of live traditions, and in Beyond Reason: Essays on the
Philosophy of Paul K. Feyerabend, where | write that Лrelativism is as
much of a chimaera as absolutism [the idea that there exists an
objective truth], its cantankerous twinС. In the same book I call my
earlier advice to keep hands off traditions an ЛidiocyС.* In both cases I
raise objections against relativism, indicate why I changed my mind,
and mention some of the remaining difficulties.

Andrew Lugg adds that my Лcommitmentto relativism as a general
theory (or principled outlook) is considerably less than total and [that
I] can plausibly be read as arguing that the trouble with traditional
versions of relativism is that they are pitched at too high a level of
abstractionС.> This is certainly true of what I say in Farewell — but
anticipations (which I notice only now, as a result of LuggСs
comments) occur already in Science in a Free Society.© There |
distinguish between participants and external observers of traditions,
describe objectivism as an illusion created by the special position of
the former and summarize my arguments in a series of theses, all of
them printed in italics. Thesis i reads: Traditions are neither good
nor bad, they simply are. Thesis ii: A tradition assumes desirable or

1. Can Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 21, 1991, p. 116- received 1989.

2. Oxford, 1991, pp. 151ff. (MS finished 1989/90.)

3. Dodrecht, 1991, p. 515. (MS finished 1989.)

4. ibid,, p. 509.

5. loc. cit.

6. London, 1978, part 1, section 2, pp. 274 - reprinted without change in Chapter
17 of the second edition of Against Method, London, 1988, and with added commentin
Chapter 17, pp. 225ff of the present edition.


POSTSCRIPT ON RELATIVISM 269
undesirable properties only when compared with some tradition, i.e.
only when viewed by participants whosee the world in terms of their
own values. And so on. This sounds like Protagoras, and I say so, in
thesis iii. However, I then describe (theses v and vi) how traditions
interact. I discuss two possibilities, a guided exchange and an open
exchange. A guided exchange adopts Лa well-specified tradition and
accept{s] only those responses that correspond to its standards. If one
party has not yet become a participant... he will be badgered,
persuaded, ЛeducatedС until he does — and then the exchange begins.Ф
ЛA rational debateС, | continue, Лis a special case of a guided exchange.С
In the case of an open exchange Лthe participants get immersed into
each otherСs ways of thinking, feeling, perceiving to such an extent
that their ideas, perceptions, world-views may be entirely changed —
they become different people participating in a new and different
tradition. An open exchange respects the partner whether he is an
individual or an entire culture, while a rational exchange promises
respect only within the framework of a rational debate. An open
exchange has no organon though it may invent one; there is no
logic though new forms of logic may emerge in its course.С In sum,
an open exchange is part of an as yet unspecified and unspecifiable
practice.

These comments imply, first, that traditions are rarely well defined
(open exchanges are going on all the time) and, secondly, that their
interactions cannot be understood in general terms. Keeping
traditions alive in the face of external influences we act in an only
partly conscious way. We can describe results after they have
occurred, we cannot incorporate them into a lasting theoretical
structure (such as relativism). In other words, there cannot be any
theory of knowledge (except as part of a special and fairly stable
tradition), there can at most be a (rather incomplete) history of the
ways in which knowledge has changed in the past. In my next book I
shall discuss some episodes of such a history.

In the meantime I have started using the term ЛrelativismС again,
but in a new sense. In the second edition of the present book I
explained this sense by saying that ЛScientists [and, for that matter, all
members of relatively uniform cultures] are sculptors of reality.Ф
That sounds like the strong programme of the sociology of science
except that sculptors are restricted by the properties of the material
they use. Similarly individuals, professional groups, cultures can
create a wide variety of surroundings, or ЛrealitiesС — but not all

7. op. cit, p. 270. Cf. also the more detailed account in ЛRealism and the
Historicity of KnowledgeС, Journal of Philosophy, 1989.


270 AGAINST METHOD

approaches succeed: some cultures thrive, others linger for a while
and then decay. Even an ЛobjectiveС enterprise like science which
apparently reveals Nature As She Is In Herself intervenes,
eliminates, enlarges, produces and codifies the results in a severely
standardized way — but again there is no guarantee that the results
will congeal into a unified world. Thus all we apprehend when
experimenting, or interfering in less systematic ways, or simply living
as part of a well-developed culture is how what surrounds us responds
to our actions (thoughts, observations, etc.); we do not apprehend these
surroundings themselves: Culture and Nature (or Being, to use
a more general term) are always entangled in a fashion that can be
explored only by entering into further and even more complicated
entanglements.

Now, considering that scientists use different and often contradictory methods of research (I describe some of them in Chapter 19 of
the present edition), that most of these methods are successful and
that numerous non-scientific ways of life not only survived but
protected and enriched their inhabitants we have to conclude that
Being responds differently, and positively, to many different
approaches. Being is like a person who shows a friendly face to a
friendly visitor, becomes angry at an angry gesture, remains unmoved
by a bore without giving any hint as to the principles that make Him
(Her? It? Them?) act the way they do in the different circumstances.
What we find when living, experimenting, doing research is therefore
not a single scenario called Лthe worldС or ЛbeingС or ЛrealityС but a
variety of responses, each of them constituting a special (and not
always well-defined) reality for those who have called it forth. This is
relativism because the type of reality encountered depends on the
approach taken. However, it differs from the philosophical doctrine
by admitting failure: not every approach succeeds. In my reply to
critics® I called this form of relativism ЛcosmologicalС relativism, in
an article published in /rideС I spoke of an ЛontologicalС relativism, in
ЛNature as a Work of ArtС! I argued that the world of modern
science (and not only the description of this world) is an artwork
constructed by generations of artisan/scientists while in ЛRealism
and the Historicity of KnowledgeС! J indicated how such views are
related to the ideas of Niels Bohr. In the last article I also mentioned
st In Gonzalo Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, Dodrecht-Boston-London, 1991, p-

9. No.8, n.s.,Jan.—Apr. 1992.

10. Common Knowledge, Vol. 1, No. 3, 1993.

11. op. cit., foomote 7 above.


POSTSCRIPT ON RELATIVISM 271
that ontological relativism might be similar to Thomas KuhnСs more
recent philosophy.

Having before me a copy of KuhnСs Robert and Maurine
Rothschild Distinguished Lecture of 19 November 1991 I can now
describe the similarities and the differences in greater detail.

We both oppose the strong programme in the sociology of science.
As a matter of fact I would say, exactly as Kuhn does, that Лthe claims
of the strong programmeС are Лabsurd: an example of deconstruction
gone madС. I also agree that it is not enough to undermine the
authority of the sciences by historical arguments: why should the
authority of history be greater than that of, say, physics? All we can
show historically is that a general appeal to scientific authority runs
into contradictions. That undermines any such appeal; however, it
does not tell us how science should now be interpreted or used.
(Such questions, I would say, have to be answered by the interested
parties themselves, according to their standards, conceptions,
cultural commitments.)

Kuhnsays that Лthe difficulties that have seemed to undermine the
authority of science should not be simply seen as observed facts about
its practice. Rather they are necessary characteristics of any
developmental or evolutionary process.С But how do we know that
science is an evolutionary process rather than a static way of finding
more facts and better laws? Either from Лobserved facts about its
practiceС or from interpretations that are imposed from the outside.
In the first case we are back at the situation Kuhn wants to overcome
while the second case means that science is being incorporated into a
wider (cultural) context — a context that values developments — and is
interpreted accordingly (the procedure I mentioned in parentheses
above). It seems that is what Kuhn really wants, i.e. he wants tosettle
the question philosophically, not by appealing to facts. I would agree
if I knew that for him this is one way among many and not the only
possible procedure.

Summarizing his argument Kuhn makes three assertions. ЛFirst,
the Archimedian platform, outside history, outside of time and space,
is gone beyond recall.С Yes, and no. It is gone as a structure that can
be described and yet shown to be independent of any description. Itis
not gone as an unknown background of our existence which affects
us but in a way which forever hides its essence. Nor is
Archimedianism gone as a possible approach. It would be the
politically correct approach in a theocracy, for example.

Secondly, Kuhn says that in the absence of an Archimedian
platform Лcomparative evaluation is all there isС. That is of course true
~and trivially so. Thirdly, he challenges the traditional notion of truth


272 AGAINST METHOD

as correspondence to reality. ЛI am not suggesting, let me emphasize,
that there is a reality which science fails to get at. My points, rather,
that nosense can be made of the notion ofa reality as it has ordinarily
functioned in the philosophy of science.С Here I agree with the
proviso that more metaphysical notions of reality (such as those
proposed by Pseudo Dionysius Areopagita) have not yet been
disposed of.

Let me repeat that the cultures that call forth a certain reality and
these realities themselves are never well defined. Cultures change,
they interact with other cultures and the indefiniteness resulting
therefrom is reflected in their worlds. This is what makes
intercultural understanding and scientific change possible: potentially every culture is all cultures. We can of course imagine a world
where cultures are well defined and strictly separated and where
scientific terms have finally been nailed down. In such a world only
miracles or revelation could reform our cosmology.


Index
Alberti, Leon Battista 242 perspective 185n, 187, 199-201,
anamnesis 71-3, 105 203,215
anarchism 49 The Assayer (Galileo) 39-40n, 80
anythinggoes 14,231 astronomy
epistemological 9 ancient 36n, 135, 136
methodology and 9-10, 12-13, Ptolemaic 135-6
19,262 mediaeval 135, 136
naive 47-9, 231 seealso Copernicus; Galileo;
political 12-13 Newton; telescope
Anaximander 95, 185 auxiliary sciences 51-2, 110,
Anscombe, Elizabeth 259-60 113-14
anthropology 188-90, 197
case study of quantum Bacon, Francis 32n, 60, 112-13n,
tribe 190-1 117-18
anything goes see anarchism Barrow, Isaac 45-6
appearances 195n, 197-8, 203 Bohm, David 262
see also natural Bohr, Niels 15n, 31-2, 40
interpretations Boltzmann, Ludwig 46
argument Brahe, Tycho 55, 135, 142
emotionsand 16-17 Brecht, Bertolt 9,259
incommensurability and 150 Brownian motion (Dr Robert
value of 15-17, 64 Brown) 27-8, 28n, 262n
see also anarchism; Bruno,Giordano 127
incommensurability Burbidge, C. 241
Aristotle
Copernican theory and 72-3, Carnap, Rudolph 119
79 Chambers, Robert 240
cosmology 44, 109-12,135,141, children
233-4 developmentof 15-17
dynamics and motion 34n, 121, perceptual stages 150, 167-8
135 Chalmers, Alan 76n
intuitive view ofhumans 124 China
knowledge & perception 89 medicine 36-7
Arp, Halton 242, 245 Church & Christianity 248
art accepts proven science 132-3
archaic style and perception attitudes 125-6, 130-1
169-186 Galileo and 124, 125-34


274 INDEX
clashing with accepted theories crisis, theory of 145-6
seecounterinduction critical rationalism 147, 151-8
classical mechanics 46-7, 72-3, seealso Popper, Karl; rationalism
113 culture 3-4
classifications 164-6
common sense Dadaism 265-6
Copernicanism and 103-4,110,  Descartes,René 54
112-13 Discourseon Method 49n
see also natural interpretations; dialectic 18
observation Diogenes of Sinope 62
communication discovery 1-2, 46-7, 106,117
guided vs open 45-6, 229 seealso science; theories of science
concepts Duhem, Pierre 24
archaic/paratactic 170-6,
177-85, 199-203, 218-19 education 263-5
changes of 155 science 2, 11-12, 161-2
integralnature of 60-1, 205 Ehrenhaft, Felix 28, 47
totalitarianism of 165-9, Einstein, Albert
199-207 Brownian motion and 28
see also ideas; counterinduction; methodology 10-11, 42-3n,
natural interpretations 138n, 163, 239
consistency condition 24-7, 28-30, theory 18,44, 107,242
50, 234-5 electrodynamics 47
Copernicus, Nicholas empiricism 18, 20,29, 72, 109-10,
acceptance of 96, 145-6 117-18, 147
defies evidence 17,35, 39-40, Aristotle and 109-10
51, 60,61 autonomy principle 29
effectofЛRevolutionС 135-6 epistemological illusion 73
GalileoСs defence of 72,77 epistemology 9,11, 12,136
methodology 138-42 illusions 73, 138, 156
symbol of progress 116-21 prejudices 196-7
theory detached from experience _essentialism see paratactic
103-4, 110, 112-13 aggregates
see also Galilei, Galileo evaluation of theoriessee
cosmology 238,241,242 methodology
archaic 184-6, 188, 198-9, 239 Evans-Pritchard, E.E. 189
Aristotleand 44, 109-12, 135, events, effects on science] 6-17, 138
141 experience see natural
cultural perceptionsand 175-6 interpretations; observation
finite 233-4 experiments see empiricism;
need for re-evaluation 113-15, facts
seealsoastronomy; concepts facts
counterinduction autonomy principle 26-7
Copernican theory and 51-3, collection & discovery 77, 144-5
77-80 selection & suppression 20-1,
tool for research 20-3, 61-4 50-1, 155


INDEX 275
theoretical nature 11, 22, Hanson,N.R. 212
39-40, 63 Hanfmann, G.M.S. 175
see also counterinduction; Heraclitus 95, 203-4
empiricism; natural hermetic writings 35, 141
interpretations Hesse, Mary 34-6
fairy-tales see myths & fairy-tales history
faith see religion conceptual changes 172, 201
falsification 23, 145, 154,221 education ofscience 11-12
science suffocated by 50-1, 154 evaluation oftheories 1-2, 32,
see also critical rationalism; 33-7, 107-8, 212
Popper, Karl events of, effects on science
Favaro, Antonio 127 16-17
Feigl, Herbert 147-8, 212 materialism 259
Feller, Margaret 242, 245-6 methodology 9-10, 51-3, 147-8
Frank, Philipp 257 traditions 225-6, 228
formalism see logic world views 243-5
freedom 17,228-9 Hollitscher, Walter 257-9
Homer 177-82, 203, 204
Galilei, Galileo 17-18, 39-40, 49, humanitarianism 3-4, 162,228
54,123 Hubble, E.P. 239
TheAssayer 39-40n, 80 Hume, David 50
boat argument 65-7 hypnagogic hallucination 182n
counterinduction and 77-80 hypotheses 106
dynamics & mechanics 24-5 adhoc 14-15, 44, 49, 75
moonand 91-9 contradictory 14-15, 20-3
propaganda 65, 70-3, 76n, seealso ideas; theories
104-5, 118
Sidereus Nuncius 81-2 idealism 222-3, 230-1
telescope and optics 81-5, ideas
88-90, 99-102 andaction 17,149, 216,232
tower argument 54-60, 68, comparison tootherideas 21
74-6, 107 see also concepts; hypotheses
trialsof 125-34 ideology 17-18, 62, 184
seealsoChurch; Copernicus, Iliad(Homer) 177-82, 203, 204
Nicholas incommensurability 150, 165, 190
Giedymin,J. 192-3 authorСs arrival at thesis 211-13,
Gottsched, Johann 219 262-3
governmentand science 163 suspension of universals 205-7
grammar see language & inconsistency see consistency
linguistics theory; facts
Greeks, ancient 264-5 individual, development of 12
art & culture shape views 170-4, see also freedom; humanitarianism
177-87, 198-202 inductive logic see logic
astronomy & cosmology 36n, instruments 17,110,232
184-7, 197-202 see also telescope
see also Aristotle; Plato; intuition 11,150
Parmenides irrationalism 158, 204


276 INDEX
Japan 250 Lorenz, Konrad 131n, 245
justification 147-9 Luria, S.E. 238-9, 242
Lysenko, Tromfim D. 37,160
Kant, Immanuel 51, 55-6, 56n
Kaufmann, W. 40 McMullin, Eman 68-9n, 91n
Kepler,Johann 24, 94n, 242 Maestlin, Michael 135-6, 142-4
Optics 45, 82, 88, 91n, 98n, Marx, Karl, & Marxism 107n
99-100 mathematics 50, 136, 195
polyopia of 88n Maxwell, James Clerk 46,241
Kierkegaard, Soren 17,154 Medawar, Peter 131n
knowledge 21 medicine 36-8, 249
ЛAmericaof 216 Melanchthon, Philip 135
enumeration vs understanding mentalsets 199, 202
184-6 Merz,Johann T. 243-4
see also epistemology metaphysics, science as 76, 78, 114,
Kraft Circle 254-5 121, 154,245
Kropotkin, Peter A. 13 methodology
Kuhn, Thomas 31, 211, 212-13 as the activity of science 239-42
anarchistic 9-10, 12-13, 19,231
Lagella, Julius Caesar 84 counterinduction 20-3, 51-3,
Lakatos, Imre 34n, 158n, 162-3 61-4
language & linguistics critical rationalism 147, 151-8
classification 164-5 empiricism 18, 20,29, 72,
deterioration of 266 109-10, 117-18
effect of 164,172, 199 falsification 23, 50-1, 145, 155
invention of scientific 11, 18, law & order 13,19
63-4, 71, 150, 193-4 logicand 10n, 11, 15n, 106, 152,
observation 57, 59, 64, 71,112 190-7, 221
philosophy 206-7,220 patience needed with status
relativity principle 208-9 quo 114-15
translating ideas & concepts pluralistic 20-3,28,32,33, 108
188-9, 206-7, 209-10 preconceptionsin 1-2, 50-3
law & order see under methodology problems of 187-97
learning see education rational 12-13, 17, 147
Lessing, Gotthold 219-20 scientific progressand 14-19,
Lenin, Vladimir 1 9n, 10 157-8
liberty see freedom see also hypotheses; rationalism;
linguistics see language & linguistics science; theories of science
Loewy, Emmanuel 170-1 Mill, John Stuart 119, 194
logic describes acceptance of theories
anthropology and 190-4 29-30, 31
contradiction of 15n, 194-6 On Liberty 34n, 38
falsification 50-1 mind/body problem 64, 123-4
inductive 15, 152 model theory see theories of
limits speculation 11, 106, 192, science
195 morality 16,253
Lorentz, Hendrik 46-7 seealso humanitarianism


INDEX 277
motion perception 95, 108-9, 114,152
Galileo and 55-60, 65-76, ofarchaic cultures 169-75
120-1 conceptual framework and
perpetual 27-8, 28n 164-8, 175-7
relativity of 69-70n, 70-1 seealso natural interpretations;
myth & fairy-tales 21,36n, 53 observation; perspective
perpetual motion 27-8, 28n, 262n
naturalinterpretations 22,59, Perry, Commander Matthew 250
60-5, 74 perspective 185n, 187, 199-200,
see also observation 202-3, 215, 242
naturalism 222-3, 231-2 Philosophical Investigations
Neumann, John von 49n (Wittgenstein) 261
Neurath, Otto 149 philosophyof science 1-4, 9, 148,
Newton, Isaac 35, 40, 168 151, 154, 196-7
acceptance of theory 24-5 ЛpragmaticС 217-18, 227-8
optics 44-6 standards 233
Nuer peoples 189-90 see also Bacon, Francis; Kuhn,
Thomas; theories of science
objectivity 217,221-2, 225-6, 228 physics 47,73, 113
see also facts; mental sets see also motion; optics
observation Piaget,Jean 167
astronomical vs terrestrial 84-5, Plato 71,151,245
86-92 pluralism 20-3, 29, 32, 33
Copernicus moves science Plutarch 96,98, 204—5n
from 103-5, 110,112 Popper, Sir Karl R. 34n, 42n, 147,
historical changes 52 151-8
language 57,59, 64,71, 112 authorСs acquaintance with
naturalinterpretations 22,59, 260-1
60-5, 74 Prandtl, L. 240
sensory 56-7, 234 prejudice, recognition 22-3, 58
theoriesand 39, 149, 151 presuppositions 58
see also methodology; perception; see also facts: theoretical nature
telescope propaganda 16-17, 114
Odyssey (Homer) 178 Galileoand 65, 70-3, 76n,
ontology 155, 175-6 104-5, 118
Optics(Kepler) 45, 82, 88, 91n, Protagoras 226
98n, 99-100 Pseudo Dionysius Apropagita 248
optics 24, 44-6, 137-8, 242 psychology see mental sets;
natural observation 86-7 perception
telescope and 82, 86-98, 104-5 Ptolemy (Claudius
Oresme, Nicole 248 Ptolemaeus) 135, 137-40
public participation in science 2,21
paratactic aggregates 169-75, Pythagoreans 35
177-86, 199-202
Parmenides 43-4, 62, 204 quantum theory 18,44
participant vs observer 215-21 case study of 190-1
passion (Kierkegaardian) 17 Quine, Willard van Orman 212


278 INDEX
rationalism 2, 62, 64, 114, Sidereus Nuncius (Galileo) 81-2
160-1, 246, 265 speculation see hypotheses; ideas;
critical 147, 151-8 metaphysics
falsification 23, 50-1, 145, 154 Stalin, Joseph 257
ЛLawof ReasonС 12-13 state see government
nature of 15, 115-16, 224-5 statusquo 114-15
objectivity 217,221-2, 225-6, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
228 (Kuhn) 31,212-13
reconstruction 191 Swiss cheese theory 262
vsscience 214-15
standards within 230 technology 263
realism 141-2, 144 telescope
naive 59-60, 70-1 celestial difficulties 86-91
reality assumptions 141-2 Galileoand 81-5, 120
relativity senses and 93-102, 103-4
EinsteinСs 18-19, 40-1, 48-9 terrestrial success 83-4
GalileoСs 73-4, 118 see also optics
religion 11,53, 137,218 tests see empiricism; methodology
co-existence with science Thales 185n
seealso Church & Christianity theology see Church & Christianity;
research religion
see facts; empiricism; theories of science
methodology acceptanceof 17-18, 30-2, 63,
Sacrobosco,Johannes 136 changing of perceptions 20-3,
Schwarzchild solution 48 52-3, 123-4
science consistency conditions 24-7,
anarchism 9-10, 12-13, 14, 28-30, 50, 234-5
19 historicalview 1-2, 32, 33-7
auxiliary 51-2, 110, 113-14 incommensurability 150, 165,
chauvinismin 2-4, 37 190, 205-7, 211-13
coherence vssubdivision 136-8, justification 147-9
144 asmetaphysics 76, 78, 114,121,
conservativismin 11,106, 192 154
culturalinfluence 3-4 numerical disagreement 39-42
discovery & success 2-4, 46-7, qualitative disagreement 39,
106, 116, 148 42-50
education and 2, 11-12, 161-2 philosophical 1-4, 9, 31, 148,
moneyand 37 151, 154, 196, 212-13
standards 1, 12, 161-3,214, separation from observation 147,
227-8, 231, 232-3, 238-42 151-8
worldviews 243-5 terminology 11,18, 63-4, 71,
see also history; methodology; 150, 202-3
philosophy of science; theories worldviews 243-5
of science seealso concepts; history;
senses see under natural hypotheses; methodology;
interpretations; observation science


INDEX 2
tradition 225-6, 228 White, Lynn 249
see also history Whorf, Benjamin L. 164-5, 176,
translation 207 209,210
Wilson, E.O. 247-8
understanding Wittgenstein, Ludwig 224, 260
seeknowledge; perception Philosophical Investigations 261
USA, unfree society 229 world views, abstract 243-5
value judgements 221,227 Xenophanes 95
Voodooand witchcraft 35-6, 78n
Zahar, Elie 157n
Weizicker, C.F.von 262 Zeno 62
