===== PAGE 1 =====

b “Social

| Research |
> Methods

| 7 and

| Statistics

LS Ppaaaer

Computer-

) Assisted

} ¢ Introduction

oe

| William

_ Sims 2
_ Bainbridge |
ei \

===== PAGE 2 =====

|
|

ue CHAPTER

| .
An Introduction to

| .

Social Research
CHAPTER OUTLINE
The Logic of Scientific Research The Partnership between Research and Statistics

The Formal-Operational Mode Writing Proposals and Reports

The Interpretive-Advocacy Mode The Ethics of Research

Discovery and Proof Ethics of Research on Human Subjects

A Parable about Brute Facts Code of Ethics of the American Sociological
Explaining Research Findings with Theories Association

The Sociological Process Confidentiality and Anonymity

, CHAPTER OVERVIEW
We begin our exploration of sociological re- a research project, however, it is essential
search and social statistics with two topics that _to consider its ethics, to make sure that humah .
must be covered before anything else: the logic _ beings will not be harmed by participating in it.

i - of social research and the ethics of social re- Although it is important to understand the a
search. Thus, before we carry out actual social _ philosophical ideas presented in this chapter, ,. 1
research, we need to consider its philosophy. real research is usually far less abstract and far
There are two main ways to do social research, _ more fragmentary. The typical research project

t the formal-operational approach (which is sim- aims to uncover some particular facts. Al- .
ilar to the approaches of the physical sciences) _ though the information unearthed by any given
and the interpretive-advocacy approach (which _ social science study can contribute to our evaluis more like the approaches of the humanities). ation of a general theory, usually it takes a
In the more systematic formal-operational whole series of research studies, done by differapproach, the sociologist develops a chain of _ ent people applying different methods, to
logic rather like a formal proof in mathematics. __establish the truth or falsity of a general theory.

From a general theory, the sociologist deduces Because it seeks to be scientific, there is a
various hypotheses and operationalizes key logic to social\research; ahd because it concerns
concepts in these hypotheses with concern for human beings, there is a morality.to it as well.”
how they can be measured. Before undertaking In both science and morality, we strive to
!
1

===== PAGE 3 =====

2 CHAPTER 1 An Introduction to Social Research ‘
achieve ideals. Good social science gains — manner consistent with the rights of the people r
. knowledge that contributes to human well- under study. We begin our examination of
being. To accomplish this, research must these ideals with an overview of the concepts '
be designed carefully, according to a set of __ that guide scientific research methodology. \
i logical principles, and it must be conducted in a
a \
) ~~ The Logic of Scientific Research
i
! Sociology is a vast field, containing many ut- _ logical reasoning that deduces the empirical |
_  terly different schools of thought and research consequences of an hypothesis. For example,
approaches. Put simply, there are two general consider hypotheses about religion and suicide. i
| perspectives on sociological research and Imagine two people, one religious and the
how it should connect to theory. I call these other not. Which one should be more afraid of H
the formal-operational* and the interpretive- death? In our society, the vast majority of
advocacy modes of sociological research. This churches teach that there is life after death.
split is not sharp, and I myself have done both Therefore, the religious person should see death
| Kinds of sociology (Wuthnow 1981). It is similar as a painful but survivable transition to another |
but not identical to the distinction between plane of existence, perhaps even to a better life
quantitative and qualitative research, or be- than this one. People who are not religious, estween the natural sciences and the humanities. pecially the atheists among them, suspect that
} death is the absolute end, and therefore they
+ should be more concerned about avoiding it
The Formal-Operational Mode than very religious people would be. This Toads
The term formal-operational is taken from the to a sociological hypothesis: Suicide is more comwork of Jean Piaget, undoubtedly the most fa- 0” among religious people than among irreligious
mous and influential psychologist who studied people.
children’s development of logical thinking (In- Tam sure you can see flaws in this argu
helder and Piaget 1958). Maurice Richter (1972) ment. It is worth distinguishing two very differintroduced into sociology the proposition that ent kinds of error: logical errors and empirical
- the historical development of science parallels €!TO¥S. First, the hypothesis at the end of the
and extends the cognitive development that above paragraph may not follow logically from a
takes place in an individual's childhood; the the assumptions at the top of the paragraph. .. ‘
scientific method can thus be seen as the most Generally, it is best to make one’s deductions as
i mature way of learning about reality. Science is formal as possible, even to state them in the
both rational and empirical. It is the systematic symbolic language of formal logic, which is a .
framing and testing of hypotheses about nature. branch of mathematics and philosophy. Even as
To the extent that human society is an aspect of it stands, however, the paragraph above is
nature, it can be studied using this method. somewhat formal, working from some reason-
"A term often used by other writers to de- able general principles to a more-or-less logical
scribe what I call the formal-operational conclusion.
approach is hypothetico-deductive. The first The second possible error is that the hypothTeif of this term refers to the stating and testing esis may simply not fit reality. However logical
of hypotheses about reality, the second half to _‘it may seem, it must be tested through em-_
pirical research. We would have to do a study,
* Terms boldfaced in the text are defined in the comparing religious people, with irreligious
Glossary /Index at the back of this book. people, to see if the former really were more

===== PAGE 4 =====

' -
The Logic of Scientific Research 3
~ prone to suicide than the latter. Easier said not ideal, because some individuals with powthan done! erful beliefs may not belong to a congregation,
fe. How are we going to distinguish religious while some people who do belong may be atheit people from irreligious people? One way _ istic members of otherwise religious families.
i) would be to let them decide. We could survey —_ But one advantage of this operational definition
f one thousand people (later chapters will tell us of religiosity is that good data already exist
i exactly how to accomplish this) and ask each about it. Surveys have been done, in a number
+ one, “Are you religious?” Perhaps some will of different years, reporting the number of
say yes and others will say no. Ten years later, members of churches of various denominations
we return to the research project, find out what in each state, and each county or city, across the
happened to each of the one thousand, and United States. It turns out that the rate of
count how many committed suicide in each church membership varies greatly, being two or
if group. I think you can see that there are practi- _ three times as high in some places as in others.
| _ cal problems in this research design. First of all, Government statistics also give suicide rates for
E it asks us to wait a long time for our results: different parts of the country, allowing us to
j Furthermore, not many people commit suicide, compare the “more religious” with “less relii and out of the 1,000 we select, none of them gious” communities, to see if the former have
| may do themselves in. Perhaps we need asur- _ higher suicide rates.
r vey of 100,000 people, or a million. ‘Let there be no mistake. Researchers climb
| Practical problems aside, sociologists of rather far out on a limb when they do projects
if religion are not convinced that a simple __ like this. The data permit far from the best
. Yes/No question can properly distinguish — operationalization of the hypothesis that we can
| religious people from irreligious people. Typi- imagine. Indeed, we are now testing a someH cally, survey researchers in this field employ what different hypothesis: The suicide rate is
batteries of items about religious belief and higher in areas of the United States that possess
| practice, combining many kinds of information _ high rates of church membership than in areas that
! to provide the most solid possible basis for possess low rates of church membership. This is
' deciding how religious a person is. Several related to our original hypothesis, but it takes
experts have decided that being religious is far us ona somewhat indirect route to our research
t from a simple matter, and they have proposed goal and is certainly open to criticism. So, what
that there are as many as five different kinds of | happens when we let this new hypothesis
t religiousness (Glock and Stark 1965). Clearly, encounter real data?
i we would have to decide how we were going Crash! That was the sound of an hypothesis
to define religiousness before we could begin a crashing in complete defeat, shot down by data
; study such as this one. about the real world. Every study of this type +,
Before any hypothesis can be tested, one that I have seen, including a couple I published ,
: must decide how to define and measure its con- myself, failed to find a higher suicide rate in”
cepts, a process called operationalization. In areas with high church membership rates. In
| the example just given, the operational defini- fact, studies tend to find the exact opposite. The
tion of “religious” is answering yes to the ques- suicide rate is noticeably higher where the ,
i tion “Are you religious?” In more sophisticated church membership rate is low, not where it is
studies, the operational definition might be an- high. Now, we already said that this would not
swering, yes to most of a collection of questions —_be an ideal test of the original hypothesis, and
about religion, covering such matters as beliefs, | we might be able to find some twisted logic
prayer, church attendance, and the like. that would let us weasel out of what appears to
Many recent studies have operationalized re- be total scientific defeat. But the best evidence |
| ligiousness in terms of membership ina church we can get certainly does not support the
or other religious organization. Clearly, this is hypothesis that religion encourages suicide. ~

===== PAGE 5 =====

4 CHAPTER 1 An Introduction to Social Research
One could frame several other potentially not merely refer to operationalizing concepts in
researchable hypotheses about attitudes toward the hypotheses. It also communicates the
death: For example, religious people more precise yet dynamic nature of our mental proeasily bear the loss of loved ones than do non- cesses. In mathematics, an operator is a symbol
religious people. Religious people face their denoting an operation to be performed, as “+”
own deaths with greater calm that do nonrelig- tells you to divide one number by another.
ious people. Religious people are more ready to Whether you call it hypothetico-deductive or
Kill their enemies in war than are nonreligious formal-operational, this approach has what we
people. This last hypothesis is not very pleas- might call a mechanical aspect. That is, much of
ant, and there might be good reason to argue _the work could be done by a machine, such as
the opposite (“Thou shalt not kill”). But now — an appropriately programmed computer.
we have four hypotheses that are all more-or- Indeed, computer programs have been written
less logical consequences of the idea that that fairly effectively simulate scientific research
‘ religion makes death seem less terrible. Any _(Langley, Simon, Bradshaw, and Zytkow 1987).
of these hypotheses could be the focus of The computer programs in our software packempirical research. age are going to help us through the “mechaniIn science, we use the term theory to refer cal” aspects, but we still have to work with
to a statement that can generate two or more — them imaginatively.
potentially testable hypotheses. There is no But infrahuman animals cannot do scientific
strict distinction between a theory and an hy- research. It takes a well-developed mind to
pothesis. You might say that theories are big frame theories, deduce hypotheses, operationahypotheses. I define them as hypotheses of great lize concepts, systematically collect data, and
scope, implying many lesser hypotheses. Al- evaluate the hypotheses in light of the results
most invariably, we cannot test a theory itself, Writing about Piaget's work in a highly
simply because it is too general, but we can log- regarded introductory sociology textbook,
ically derive hypotheses from a theory and test Stark (1989:152) notes the development of forthem, Sometimes, as in the previous example, mal operational thinking in early adolescence:
we have to work through a chain of hypothe- “Eventually ... some people learn to think
ses, operationalizing concepts as best we can abstractly and to impose logical tests on their
until we find an hypothesis that can be tested. _ideas. .. . [W]hen they reach the formal operaNow you can see the meaning of hypothetico- tional stage, people can formulate and manipudeductive, a term that refers to the following ate theories and logically deduce fromy these
basic process of science. We have a theory. _ theories that certain things are likely to be true
Logically, we deduce from this theory various or false. With this comes the ability to think
hypotheses whose concepts can be empirically  hypothetically—to say ‘what if?’ and then trace
operationalized. We perform research, and if the logical implications of this supposition.”
the data support the hypotheses, then the — You have undoubtedly reached this stage and
theory is also supported. If the data fail to can understand the formal-operational mode of
support the hypotheses, then our confidence in __ sociological research. .
the theory is greatly weakened. :
I like Piaget’s term formal-operational, al- .
though I give it slightly broader meaning than The Interpretive-Advocacy Mode
he did. It stresses that our logic and our Interpretive sociology seeks the human meaning
methods of research should be as formal as of a social phenomenon. Often, interpretive
possible. We should make all our assumptions sociologists say their aim is simply to document
explicit. Each step in our logical deductions what certain situations and experiences mean
should be made as clearly as possible, spelled —_to_ their participants (Blumer 1969; Truzzi
out even in fine detail. The operational part does 1974). Because interpretation is never entirely
!

===== PAGE 6 =====

The Logic of Scientific Research 5
neutral, and given the history of interpretive to new possibilities and considering slightly
approaches in sociology, I add the word advo- _ unfamiliar insights. But interpretive-advocacy
cacy to the name for this approach. Many, if sociology comes in many varieties, each appeali not all, interpretive sociologists advocate a ing most strongly to the audiences who already
particular set of values, politico-economic share a general perspective with it.
i policies, or other personal commitments Over the past several years, I have sought a
through their research publications. Indeed, in- _ way of bringing together most varieties of
t terpretive research becomes a medium through interpretive sociology, and 1 have become
7 which sociologists can express their personal convinced that this is possible because they
feelings as well as those of the people they all have something in common: language.
study. The way scholars interpret a social phenome-
| Thus, it is hard to teach interpretiveadvocacy _non is to find the right words to express their
| sociology in a general textbook. Simply put, impressions of it. Most recently, I have had
| can’t tell you how to do this kind of sociology the marvelous opportunity and challenge of
} because I do not know who you are. Ido not editing the sociology and social psychology
know your personal values, or your political sections of the forthcoming Encyclopedia of
, persuasion, or your aesthetics. Language and Linguistics, to be published by
Self-aware practitioners of this approach Aberdeen University Press in collaboration
t often urge reflexivity or tell their students to with Pergamon Press. If you are interested
include a reflexive component in their research __in exploring the possibilities for interpretive
{ and writing. This means to acknowledge that sociology, you might want to check out
| your image of a social phenomenon will always _ the encyclopedia’s essays on the sociology of
reflect your own standpoint to some extent. language and some of the particular schools
| What you see will reflect where you look of interpretation: attribution theory, ethnofrom—literally your perspective or viewpoint. methodology, labeling theory, sociology of
‘ Thus, a sociological essay is always a product knowledge, symbolic crusades, and symbolic
of both the writer and the data. You must ana- _interactionism. If I am right, however, serious
} lyze your own commitments, biases, and habits _ interpretive sociology of the future will become
of perception, perhaps including an analysis of _ very much like linguistics, and this textbook
i yourself along with the analysis of the phenom- cannot cover that vast academic discipline
enon under study. Reflecting upon your own currently outside the domain of sociology.
role as sociologist makes your work reflexive. Therefore, this textbook will emphasize the
| Naturally, this means that different interpre-  formal-operational mode of _ sociological ‘
tive sociologists will have different audiences. research. *
We see this most obviously with topics and ‘
approaches that have a strong political aspect. . ‘
For example, political conservatives are un- «
likely to enjoy reading Marxist sociology. It is Discovery and Proof
| not merely that interpretations made from a Luck plays a role in scientific discoveries, .
political standpoint other than your own will and the invention of theories and testable
offend your values and advocate things that hypotheses is as much an art as a science. As :
you detest; these interpretations are also likely A. M. Taylor (1967:ix) says it: “To achieve an
to seem completely arbitrary and even mean- advance in knowledge, the experimenter must
ingless to you. put the right question, understand the reply,
This is not to say that you will like only and have the wit to perceive the next step in .
those sociologists who happen to have exactly the argument. Inspiration and imagination,
your personal beliefs and sentiments. We boldness and perseverance are qualities neces-
; all like occasionally having our eyes opened sary to the scientist no less than the artist,

===== PAGE 7 =====

(
6 CHAPTER 1 An Introduction to Social Research
musician, or poet.” William Beveridge (1950:44) 3. The researcher must be prepared to
argues: “That aspect of the scientist's mind interpret the chance observation and
which demands convincing evidence should be recognize its potential significance. The
1 reserved for the proof stage of the investigation. great French biologist Louis Pasteur is
t In research, an attitude of mind is required for reputed to have said, “In the fields of
I discovery which is different from that required observation, chance favors only the mind
I for proof, for discovery and proof are distinct that is prepared.” Before you can
processes.” understand the meaning of an unexpected
Many influential scientific hypotheses have scientific observation, you must have
sprung from the irrational intuition of theorists studied the appropriate subject in
\ and researchers, and pure chance has played a sufficient depth. As it happened, I had
| significant role in discovery as well. An exam done my Ph.D. oral exam in the sociology
| ple of dumb luck from my own research is the and anthropology of mental disorder, so a
. discovery that the original records of mental sudden encounter with unexpected
; hospitals in the 1860 U.S. census frequently psychiatric data immediately suggested
listed the supposed cause of insanity of the in- possibilities for analysis.
mate, data that could be used to understand the 4. The chance discovery will be lost if the
prevailing psychiatric theories of the day researcher fails to follow up on it. A trip
(Bainbridge 1984b). I had been scanning end- to my university's library, which
lessly through microfilms of the 1860 census re- possessed the published volumes of the
cords, hunting for all the utopian communes, 1960 census and other reports of the
because no index to the records existed. Scan- period, quickly gave me a list of 43 major
f ning a microfilm roll for Ohio, in search of a insane asylums that were in operation by
particular Shaker community, I stumbled across the end of 1860, and within a few days I
the records for a mental hospital, and I saw im- had located the census records for all but
; mediately that the causes listed for all the one of them, which undoubtedly opened
patients’ insanity would make a fascinating a few months after the census was taken.
study. Beveridge (1950) lists six factors that are Only 17 of these 42 asylums actually
essential if the scientist is going to be able to listed the supposed causes of insanity for
exploit chance opportunities: the inmates, so I was lucky to have run
across one that did. ‘

1. Because lucky accidents are rare, the 5. A discovery may not have an application
researcher must invest much time and until several years later; thus, some
energy to give them a significant chance accidental discoveries may come at the
of happening. I suppose I was bound to wrong time. Beveridge wrote primarily .

i find something interesting in the census about discoveries in biology, and many

; records, because my work required me to accidental observations in that field could
invest hundreds of hours visually not be followed up until particular
scanning hundreds of the microfilm rolls. research methods had been developed, or.

2. When a lucky accident does happen, the theory had advanced to the point where

; researcher has to notice it, and this the chance observations had meaning, or
requires acute powers of observation. it was possible to find a practical

\ Frankly, the microfilm work was so application sisch as the cure of a disease.
boring that I would pause and scrutinize Had I run across the records for the Ohio
anything at all that looked unusual on the mental hospital back in the 1960s, I could
microfilms, and large institutions stood have gone no further, because only in the
out like sore thumbs. 1970s did the federal government make

4 !

===== PAGE 8 =====

q The Logic of Scientific Research 7
3 available a complete microfilm copy of not, in principle, imagine evidence that would
the entire 1860 census. disprove a theory, then the theory must not say

: a 6. Finally, Beveridge says, a discovery may anything decisive about reality.

have to run a gauntlet of skepticism and
: resistance on the part of others. Certainly,
: my little study of madness in the 1860 A Parable about Brute Facts
census encountered no resistance, being Consider the following parable. One day, the
; accepted for publication by the first word went out in the People’s Republic of
journal I sent it to. But on occasion, China that on the following Saturday every citibrand-new science does encounter zen was to proceed to a designated field, beach,
opposition from members of the general or hillside in the country, mark out an acre of
f public or even from scientists themselves. Jand, and count the stones and bushes on it,
: 7 tet tallying the number of each variety. Over the
, _ The process of imagining a new theory or fojfowing week, each of these one billion peo-

i discovering a new phenomenon has a strong ir ple was to write a brief report, stating the char-

rational component, but theory-testing is not acteristics of the plot of land that he or she had

{ wholly rational, despite the necessity of making been assigned and noting how many of each

it as much so as possible. Strictly speaking, sci- ind of stone and bush was found there. Seven
if entific research can never prove a theory true. days afterward, the government of the PRC anTo expect absolute proof is to misunderstand Gunced proudly that this vast project had pro-

i the logic of scientific research. duced so much information that it had

t Generalizations can never be proved. They increased the scientific knowledge of humancan be tested by seeing whether kind a hundred times. It further proclaimed

, deductions made from them are in accord that China was now the leading scientific

- i nation on Earth and demanded that the Nobel

Fi with experimental and observational facts, Prizes of that year, and all the prizes for the
and if the results are not as predicted, the next century, should be awarded to it.

1 hypothesis or generalization may be Would you vote for that? Is scientific knowldisproved. But a favorable result does not edge simply a mass of facts, or is science someprove the generalization, because the thing more than a crude catalog of information?

' without its being true... . in strict logic a Every successful scientist knows that science is
generalization is never proved and more than just data. Most importantly, it is ai ;

, ins on probation indefinitely, but if it set of explanations for data. As Ernest Nagel
survives all atempts at disproof it i (1961:4) says, “It is the desire for explanations 4,

‘ : a which are at once systematic and controllable
accepted in practice, especially if it fits by factual evidence that generates science; and . ‘
tbevercae wide a theoretical scheme. it is the organization and classification of
° knowledge on the basis of explanatory princif Thus, if theories cannot be proven, they can _ples that is the distinctive goal of the sciences.” ae
j at least be disproven, and a theory that has re- Young sciences, perhaps including sociolsisted several attempts at disproof deserves our —_ ogy, may not have had the time to find and test
respect if not our unswerving belief. In the lan- __ very broad generalizations that link a wide
guage of Karl Popper (1959, 1962), a theory that range of observations. But when a science has
is capable of disproof is falsifiable. And every made great progress in discovering and
good theory is falsifiable. It must be possible to explaining phenomena, it will not merely
test a theory, to put it at risk of falsification, be- _ possess a great number of theoretical notions
fore it is of much value for science. If we could _ but a formal theory.
